input/posts/2008/11-04-i-am-voting-for-obama-and-i-urge-you-to-do-the-same.md, before:

---
Title: I Am Voting For Obama And I Urge You To Do The Same
Tags:
  - politics
  - barack obama
  - Hassan Abdullah
Published: 2008-11-04 11:26:24 +06:00
Updated: 2009-10-24 08:43:25 +06:00
OldURL: 2008/11/04/i-am-voting-for-obama-and-i-urge-you-to-do-the-same/
---

<font face="Times New Roman"></font><font face="Times New Roman">
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-weight: 700; font-family: Times New Roman"><font color="#008000">I Am Voting For Obama And I Urge You To Do The Same</font></span></p>

<font size="2" color="#000000" face="Arial" id="role_document">
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><font face="Verdana"><a href="https://muktomona.com/Articles/hassan_abullah/index.htm">HassanAl Abdullah</a></font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><font size="3" face="Verdana">Everyone says that the economy is bad. How bad? It's too bad. So, for the first time, I am afraid of going to the grocery stores. Milk is nearly four dollars a gallon. A dozen of eggs is two dollars or more. The price of vegetables and other necessary things went up to the sky. </font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><font size="3" face="Verdana">Initially an immigrant from the rice-eaten country, Bangladesh , and later becoming an US citizen, my family and I mainly eat rice and fish. The 20-pound <span id="lw_1225776008_1" class="yshortcuts">bag of rice</span>, which I used to buy for $7.99, is $13.99 now. The <em>hilsha</em> fish, usually imported from our <span id="lw_1225776008_2" class="yshortcuts">native land</span>, was $2.50 a pound, but it went up to $30. Later it came down to $7 a pound. So, my mother, who now lives with me, my wife and I understood that in this economic condition we need to cut our grocery spending. We agreed upon having at least one less item in dinner table. </font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt; text-indent: 0.5in" class="MsoNormal"><font size="3" face="Verdana">The gas price is all time high this year though <span id="lw_1225776008_3" class="yshortcuts">President Bush</span> went to <span style="cursor: hand; border-bottom: #0066cc 1px dashed" id="lw_1225776008_4" class="yshortcuts">Saudi Arabia</span> and danced with the king a little. But, the <span id="lw_1225776008_5" class="yshortcuts">Petroleum Exporting Countries</span> were not convinced with his dancing style and therefore denied increasing the oil production. So, in the midst of the gas hike, I am forced to restrict my driving habit. Like many other Americans, I don't get my car out of the garage unless it is extremely necessary. </font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt; text-indent: 0.5in" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><font size="3" face="Verdana">The economy is bad. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were taken over by the government. <span id="lw_1225776008_6" class="yshortcuts">Lehman Brothers</span> filed bankruptcy.  AIG was given 85 Billion dollars to prevent a total fall out. The job market is horrible. People are worried for bread and butter. Students don't have enough money to pay <span style="cursor: hand; border-bottom: #0066cc 1px dashed" id="lw_1225776008_7" class="yshortcuts">college tuition</span>. Parents don't have enough to pay the bills. In this situation, as a <span id="lw_1225776008_8" class="yshortcuts">high school math</span> teacher, I have to think twice to ask my students to buy a <span id="lw_1225776008_9" class="yshortcuts">scientific calculator</span> and allow them to finish the difficult task in class using the ones provided by the school.</font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><font size="3" face="Verdana">            </font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt; text-indent: 0.5in" class="MsoNormal"><font size="3" face="Verdana">Whatever the candidates say, I believe, the struggling <span id="lw_1225776008_10" class="yshortcuts">middle class citizens</span>, like my family and I, are looking for a way out of this <span style="cursor: hand; border-bottom: #0066cc 1px dashed" id="lw_1225776008_11" class="yshortcuts">economic recession</span>. The next president would have to do a lot to fix this mess. And I have a clear understanding that <span id="lw_1225776008_12" class="yshortcuts">Obama</span> is the one who will be able to do that using his listing, understanding and decision making skills. I have watched all three debates and his public appearances throughout the campaign season. I found him a decent man, who is smart and intelligent. He has a clear vision for the nation and the world. So, I am voting for Obama today (Nov 4), and I urge you to do the same. </font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>

<hr />
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-size: 10pt"><font face="Times New Roman">Mukto-Mona member Hassanal Abdullah is a <span id="lw_1225776008_13" class="yshortcuts">New York City High School</span> math teacher, poet and the author of 15 books in Bengali and one book is English. He is also the editor of a bilingual poetry journal, <em>Shabdaguchha</em>.</font></span></p>

</font></font>

Commit message:

cleanups - removing single tags - tags with author names with single post - formatting cleanup, tags cleanup etc

input/posts/2008/11-04-i-am-voting-for-obama-and-i-urge-you-to-do-the-same.md, after:

---
Title: I Am Voting For Obama And I Urge You To Do The Same
Tags:
  - politics
  - barack obama
Published: 2008-11-04 11:26:24 +06:00
Updated: 2009-10-24 08:43:25 +06:00
OldURL: 2008/11/04/i-am-voting-for-obama-and-i-urge-you-to-do-the-same/
---

<font face="Times New Roman"></font><font face="Times New Roman">
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-weight: 700; font-family: Times New Roman"><font color="#008000">I Am Voting For Obama And I Urge You To Do The Same</font></span></p>

<font size="2" color="#000000" face="Arial" id="role_document">
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><font face="Verdana"><a href="https://muktomona.com/Articles/hassan_abullah/index.htm">HassanAl Abdullah</a></font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><font size="3" face="Verdana">Everyone says that the economy is bad. How bad? It's too bad. So, for the first time, I am afraid of going to the grocery stores. Milk is nearly four dollars a gallon. A dozen of eggs is two dollars or more. The price of vegetables and other necessary things went up to the sky. </font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><font size="3" face="Verdana">Initially an immigrant from the rice-eaten country, Bangladesh , and later becoming an US citizen, my family and I mainly eat rice and fish. The 20-pound <span id="lw_1225776008_1" class="yshortcuts">bag of rice</span>, which I used to buy for $7.99, is $13.99 now. The <em>hilsha</em> fish, usually imported from our <span id="lw_1225776008_2" class="yshortcuts">native land</span>, was $2.50 a pound, but it went up to $30. Later it came down to $7 a pound. So, my mother, who now lives with me, my wife and I understood that in this economic condition we need to cut our grocery spending. We agreed upon having at least one less item in dinner table. </font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt; text-indent: 0.5in" class="MsoNormal"><font size="3" face="Verdana">The gas price is all time high this year though <span id="lw_1225776008_3" class="yshortcuts">President Bush</span> went to <span style="cursor: hand; border-bottom: #0066cc 1px dashed" id="lw_1225776008_4" class="yshortcuts">Saudi Arabia</span> and danced with the king a little. But, the <span id="lw_1225776008_5" class="yshortcuts">Petroleum Exporting Countries</span> were not convinced with his dancing style and therefore denied increasing the oil production. So, in the midst of the gas hike, I am forced to restrict my driving habit. Like many other Americans, I don't get my car out of the garage unless it is extremely necessary. </font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt; text-indent: 0.5in" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><font size="3" face="Verdana">The economy is bad. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were taken over by the government. <span id="lw_1225776008_6" class="yshortcuts">Lehman Brothers</span> filed bankruptcy.  AIG was given 85 Billion dollars to prevent a total fall out. The job market is horrible. People are worried for bread and butter. Students don't have enough money to pay <span style="cursor: hand; border-bottom: #0066cc 1px dashed" id="lw_1225776008_7" class="yshortcuts">college tuition</span>. Parents don't have enough to pay the bills. In this situation, as a <span id="lw_1225776008_8" class="yshortcuts">high school math</span> teacher, I have to think twice to ask my students to buy a <span id="lw_1225776008_9" class="yshortcuts">scientific calculator</span> and allow them to finish the difficult task in class using the ones provided by the school.</font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><font size="3" face="Verdana">            </font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt; text-indent: 0.5in" class="MsoNormal"><font size="3" face="Verdana">Whatever the candidates say, I believe, the struggling <span id="lw_1225776008_10" class="yshortcuts">middle class citizens</span>, like my family and I, are looking for a way out of this <span style="cursor: hand; border-bottom: #0066cc 1px dashed" id="lw_1225776008_11" class="yshortcuts">economic recession</span>. The next president would have to do a lot to fix this mess. And I have a clear understanding that <span id="lw_1225776008_12" class="yshortcuts">Obama</span> is the one who will be able to do that using his listing, understanding and decision making skills. I have watched all three debates and his public appearances throughout the campaign season. I found him a decent man, who is smart and intelligent. He has a clear vision for the nation and the world. So, I am voting for Obama today (Nov 4), and I urge you to do the same. </font></p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal">&nbsp;</p>

<hr />
<p style="margin: 0in 0in 0pt" class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-size: 10pt"><font face="Times New Roman">Mukto-Mona member Hassanal Abdullah is a <span id="lw_1225776008_13" class="yshortcuts">New York City High School</span> math teacher, poet and the author of 15 books in Bengali and one book is English. He is also the editor of a bilingual poetry journal, <em>Shabdaguchha</em>.</font></span></p>

</font></font>

_This is single post of Hassanal Abdullah who is a poet, novelist, critic and the author of 18 books including 10 collections of poetry. He lives in New York. Hassanal is the editor of a bilingual poetry journal, Shabdaguchha._
