---
Title: Qur'an is the Primary Manual of Islamic Suicide Terrorism!
Tags:
  - islam
  - terrorism
  - koran
  - suicide
  - religion
  - culture
  - philosophy
  - Syed Kamran Mirza
Published: 2008-12-09 21:50:03 +06:00
Updated: 2009-07-15 07:18:51 +06:00
OldURL: 2008/12/09/quran-is-the-primary-manual-of-islamic-suicide-terrorism/
---


<h2 align="center"><span style="color: #333399">Qur'an is the Primary Manual of Islamic Suicide Terrorism!</span></h2>
<p align="center" style="margin: 0.05pt 0in" class="byline"><font size="5"><a href="https://gold.mukto-mona.com/Articles/skm/index.html">Syed Kamran Mirza</a></font></p>
<p style="margin: 0.05pt 0in" class="byline">&nbsp;</p>

<blockquote>
<p align="justify"><em><span style="color: blue">"Men never do evil so completely and cheerfully as when they do it from religious conviction."  (Blaise Pascal, mathematician, 1670)</span></em></p>
</blockquote>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><span style="font-size: 18pt; color: red">B</span>y now any sane human being of 21<sup>st</sup> century should realize that </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">the religion of Islam is the main source of Islamic terrorism happening today around the world. But sadly, majority of gullible people (Muslim and non-Muslims) tend to ask questions: Does the Islam have anything to do with Terrorism? More precisely-does the Quran anyway responsible for Islamic terrorism, or Islamic suicide bombings? Some hypocritical western educated so called moderate Muslims now started to blame Hadiths (only) for Islamic terrorism/suicide bombings etc. and they are hypocritically claiming that Quran is totally innocent of this crime. These neo-islamists also claim that for all these Islamic suicide bombings and Islamic terrorism-it is the Sunnah (Ahadiths or traditions left by the Prophet Muhammad) which should be blamed, and not the Holy Quran. In this faulty or erroneous line of thinking they got their illusionary vision that, if hadiths could be dump then Islam will be very peaceful and innocent. This essay of mine has been dedicated to refute their (neo-islamists) dishonest claim about the source of Islamic terrorism.</font></p>

<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">
<strong>Background story:</strong></font>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Islam is a cultic (brotherhood or ummatic) religion by nature. The very theme of Islam is: <strong>Allah is the sole creator of everything on heaven and Earth and Muslims are His only legitimate and righteous people.</strong> Remaining all other people (Jews, Christians, Hindus etc.) are simply infidels and hated by Allah. A Muslim is a person who gets his/her life's inspiration primarily from the Quran and secondarily from the Hadiths (the Sunna). The devout Muslims believe that life's all solutions are contained in the Holy Quran and every good Muslim does believe by his heart that the Quran is the immutable divine words of Allah, infallible-unchangeable-eternal book of Allah, and they must follow this (Quran) <strong>word by word without any question</strong>. Following this line of thinking the Muslims believe that anyone who does not agree with them is kaffir and enemy of Islam; hence enemy of Allah. A Muslim must oppose his/her enemy and kill him/her by any means whenever the opportunity arises. </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Historically, Muslims in Arabia always considered their political enemies/rivals as the kaffirs (filthy, unclean, non-believers and deserves death) and always wanted to eliminate them by force. They have also considered it a blessed or holy thing to kill their enemy (kaffirs) which will please Allah and consequently they will be rewarded in this life and hereafter. If we study early Islamic history (the reigns of most Islamic caliphs) we can readily learn that there had been always bloody disputes amongst various Muslim political groups in which tens of thousands of people were slaughtered in the name of their religion. In these political disputes always one group was calling other group kaffirs or enemy of Allah. They tried to justify killing their rivals by Islamic dictums. Even today, the same patterns of religious sectarian killings are going on in Iraq, Pakistan, Afghanistan and many other Islamic nations and these are glaring examples of my above claims. As always, each party calls them the <strong>party of Allah</strong> and opposite party is the <strong>party of kaffirs</strong> who should be killed. In these sectarian killings Muslims always get their inspiration <strong>primarily from the Quranic</strong> dictums supported by Hadiths.  They never get inspiration from anything which is not in the Quran; or they never kill anybody having being inspired <strong>only from hadiths</strong>.  Because Muslims always consider Quran as the nucleus of their faith and inspiration and hadiths are used only to support Quranic dictums.  </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Islamic terrorists do kill people by their Islamic fanatical zeal which is the prime source of motivation in their killing spree. And these inspirations always come from Holy Quran. Now, question is: dose the Quran contain such verses which can easily inspire/incite devout Muslims to kill people with impunity?  Answer is there are plenty of such inciting or inspiring Quranic verses which can turn any simple/innocent minded devout Muslims <strong>into a killing monster</strong>. In fact, Quran is replete with such horrifically inciting dictums throughout the pages of Quran. Holy Quran repeatedly promised terrestrial handsome rewards for those who can kill kaffirs (<em>enemy of Allah and His messenger)</em> and dreadful punishing hellfire for those who refuse to kill kaffirs.  Quran also incite followers to sacrifice their lives in order to kill kaffirs in exchange of much better and lucrative after life. In this line <strong>just one Quranic verse<u> </u>(9:111)</strong> is most attractive to those jihadis who desperately egger to achieve heavenly rearward of 72 virgins. <u>Here is the master piece from Holy Quran</u>:</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><strong>Quran: <a target="_blank" href="https://cwis.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/009.qmt.html#009.111" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single"><span style="color: windowtext">9:111</span></a></strong>, <strong>Allah hath purchased of the believers their persons and their goods; for theirs <span style="color: red">(in return) is the garden (of Paradise)</span>: they fight in His cause, <span style="color: red">and slay</span> <span style="color: red">and are slain:</span> a promise binding on Him in truth, through the Law, the Gospel, and the Quran.</strong></font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">In addition, a strong support and explanation to the verse: 9:111 was given by Merciful Allah by the following: </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><strong>Quran-4:74</strong>- Let those <strong>fight in the cause of Allah</strong> <strong>Who sell the life</strong> of this world for the hereafter. To him who fighteth in the cause of Allah,- <strong><span style="color: red">whether he is slain or gets victory </span>(i.e. killed or be killed) -</strong> Soon shall We give him a <strong>reward of great (value).</strong> </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><strong>Quran-4:95-</strong> Not equal are those believers who sit (at home) and receive no hurt, and those who strive and fight in the <strong>cause of Allah</strong> <strong>with their goods and their persons</strong>. Allah hath granted a grade higher to those who strive and <strong><span style="color: red">fight with their goods and persons</span></strong> (sacrifice both life and wealth) than to those who sit (at home). Unto all (in Faith) Hath Allah promised good: But those who strive and fight Hath He distinguished above those who sit (at home) by a special reward.</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><strong>Quran-3:169</strong><em>-</em><strong>:</strong> Think not of <strong><span style="color: red">those who are slain in Allah's way as dead</span></strong>. Nay, they live, finding their sustenance <strong>in the presence of their Lord;</strong> <em>(Here Allah is saying that those jihadi who dies [commit suicide] is not dead but he will be living with Allah)</em>.</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Now, I do not believe that anybody can have slightest doubt that the above clear invitations (from Allah) for the ardent fanatical believers can very easily convince the blind pukka (pure) Muslims to become <strong>a time-bomb (suicidal)</strong> in order to kill infidels/kaffirs-for the cause of Allah! The above <strong>verses (9:111; 3:169; 4:74; 4:95)</strong> are clearly ordering devout Muslims <strong><span style="color: red">"to kill and be killed"</span>; </strong>that is, Allah is teaching Muslims to sacrifice their <strong>own lives (<span style="color: red">to commit suicide</span>)</strong> in His cause (Allah's cause) in order to kill infidels (enemy of Allah). This single verse (9:111) very precisely <strong>justifies suicide bombing</strong>-the most lethal, most terrifying, most inhuman and most successful weapon majority Islamic terrorists are using today to kill Allah's enemies. It is the perfect example (without any ambiguity) of suicidal method Allah has prescribed for devout Muslims. In the verse above (9:111) Islamic Allah clearly saying that: <strong>He (Allah) purchased <span style="color: red">life and property</span> of believers in exchange of lustful and unimaginable lucrative heavenly pleasures for those who <span style="color: red">will die (commit suicide</span>) for the cause (killing kaffirs) of Allah.</strong> After this, Muslims (ardent followers of the Quran) do not need any more killing instructions for their motivation to kill kaffirs/infidels. For good reason we can sum up that the Islamic God (Allah) is the most dangerous deity having unlimited vengeful, cruel, intolerant, intimidating and war-loving blood thirsty divine entity.</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">But this is not all! Quran is loaded with numerous (killing) verses ordering the ardent followers to carry out endless killing of infidels/unbelievers until only Muslims remain to inhibit this Earth owned by Islamic Allah. Here are some more examples:  </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-<a target="_blank" href="https://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/008.qmt.html#008.039" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single"><span style="color: windowtext">8:39</span></a>, <strong>And fight them on until there is no more tumult</strong> or oppression, and there <strong>prevail justice and faith in Allah altogether and everywhere (</strong><em>in this earth of Allah</em><strong>).</strong></font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-<a target="_blank" href="https://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/009.qmt.html#009.029" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single"><span style="color: windowtext">9:29</span></a>, Fight those who believe neither in Allah nor the Last Day, nor hold that forbidden which hath been forbidden by Allah and His Messenger, nor acknowledge the religion of Truth (Islam), even if they are of the People of the Book (<strong>Christians and Jews),</strong> until they <strong>pay the Jizya with willing submission, and feel themselves subdued</strong>.<span style="color: blue"> </span></font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-<a target="_blank" href="https://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/003.qmt.html#003.085" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single">3:85</a>, "<strong>If anyone desires a religion other than Islam (submission to Allah), never will it be accepted of him</strong>; and in the Hereafter He will be in the ranks of those who have lost (All spiritual good)."  </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-<a target="_blank" href="https://cwis.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/009.qmt.html#009.039" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single"><span style="color: windowtext">9:39</span></a>, <strong>Unless ye go forth, (for Jihad) He will punish you</strong> with a grievous penalty, and put others in your place; but Him ye would not harm in the least. <em>[Allah's hatred to those who are reluctant to join Islamic jihad]</em></font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-<a target="_blank" href="https://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/009.qmt.html#009.073" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single"><span style="color: windowtext">9:73</span></a>, O Prophet! <strong>strive hard against the unbelievers</strong> and the Hypocrites, and be firm against them. Their abode is Hell,- an evil refuge indeed.  </font></p>
<p align="justify" style="punctuation-wrap: simple"><font face="Verdana"><strong>Quran-8:65: "O Apostle! Rouse the believers to fight. If there are twenty amongst you, patient and persevering, they will vanquish two hundred; if a 100 , they will vanquish a 1,000 of the unbelievers.." </strong></font></p>
<p align="justify" style="punctuation-wrap: simple"><font face="Verdana"><strong>Quran-8:66:"-.if there are a 100 of you, patient and persevering, they will vanquish 2,00, and if a 1,000 , they will vanquish 2,000 (two thousands) with the leave of Allah-" </strong><em><span style="color: red">[This fabulous verse was written in the diary of Muhammad Ata the leader of 9/11 terrorists].</span></em></font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-4:78: "<strong>Where ye are, death will find you, even if ye are in Towers, built up strong and tall" (</strong><em><span style="color: red">Perhaps Twin towers was meant here?)</span> </em></font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-<a target="_blank" href="https://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/002.qmt.html#002.193" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single"><span style="color: windowtext">2:193</span></a>, <strong>And fight them on until there is no more Tumult or oppressio</strong>n  </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-<a target="_blank" href="https://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/002.qmt.html#002.216" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single"><span style="color: windowtext">2:216</span></a>, <strong>Fighting is prescribed for you, and ye dislike it</strong>. But it is possible that ye dislike a thing which is good for you<span style="color: blue"> </span></font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-<a target="_blank" href="https://cwis.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/005.qmt.html#005.033" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single">5:33</a>, The punishment of those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger, and strive with might and main for mischief through the land is: <strong>execution, or crucifixion, or the cutting off of hands and feet from opposite sides,</strong> or exile from the land: that is their disgrace in this world, and a heavy punishment is theirs in the Hereafter; </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><strong>Quran-4:89</strong>- "They but wish that ye should reject Faith, as they do, and thus be on the same footing (as they): But take not friends from their ranks until they flee in the way of Allah (From what is forbidden). But if they turn <strong>renegades</strong> (<span style="color: red">change to other</span> <span style="color: red">religions)</span>, <strong><span style="color: red">seize them and</span> <span style="color: red">kill them</span> <span style="color: red">wherever ye find them</span></strong>; and (in any case) take no friends or helpers from their ranks;-" (Punishment for the apostates). </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-<a target="_blank" href="https://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/009.qmt.html#009.005" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single"><span style="color: windowtext">9:5</span></a>, But when the forbidden months are past, then <strong>fight and slay the Pagans wherever ye find them,</strong> and seize them, beleaguer them, <strong>and lie in wait for them in every stratagem</strong>. </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-<a target="_blank" href="https://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/009.qmt.html#009.28" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single"><span style="color: windowtext">9:28</span></a>, O ye who believe! Truly the <strong>Pagans are unclean;</strong> so let them not, after this year of theirs, approach the Sacred Mosque. (This verse is a glaring example how much hatreds Islam possess against non-Muslims).  </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-8:67<strong>-"</strong><em><strong>It is not fitting for an Apostle that he should have prisoners of war until He thoroughly subdued the land</strong></em><strong>-."</strong> (Allah insisting Prophet to kill all the prisoners, and should not keep any surrendered prisoners alive)</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-8:17-<em><strong>It is not ye who Slew them; it is God; when thou threwest a handful of dust, it was not Thy act, but God's</strong></em><strong>-.." (</strong>Allah said, the killing of surrendered soldiers were done by the wish of Allah)</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran: <a target="_blank" href="https://cwis.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/009.qmt.html#009.023" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single">9:23</a>: "O ye who believe! Take not for protectors your fathers and your brothers if they love Infidelity above Faith: if any of you do so, they do wrong". <span style="color: red">[<em>Quran is asking Muslims even to go against their own father and brothers in respect of religious faith]</em></span></font></p>
<font face="Verdana">Quran:  <a target="_blank" href="https://cwis.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/003.qmt.html#009.028" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single">3:28</a>: "<strong>Let not the believers Take for friends or helpers Unbelievers</strong> rather than believers: if any do that, in nothing will there be help from Allah"
<strong>
</strong>Quran:  <a target="_blank" href="https://cwis.usc.edu/dept/MSA/quran/005.qmt.html#005.045" style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single">5:45</a><strong>:  We ordained therein for them: "Life for life, eye for eye, nose for nose, ear for ear. Tooth for tooth, and wounds equal for equal." (Does this verse sound humane?) </strong></font><font face="Verdana"><strong> 47:4-  "Therefore, when ye meet the Unbelievers (in fight),  <strong>strike off their heads;</strong>  <strong>at length; then when you have</strong> <strong>made wide Slaughter among them, carefully tie up the remaining captives": </strong>thereafter (is the time for) either generosity or ransom: Until the war lays down its burdens."</strong></font>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"> 9:123: "Oh ye who believe! <strong>Murder those</strong> of the disbelievers and let them find harshness in you."</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"> 2:191- "<strong>Kill them wherever you find them</strong>, and drive them out from wherever they drove you out."</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">8:12-<span style="color: fuchsia">  </span>Remember thy Lord inspired the angels (with the message): "I am with you: give firmness to the Believers: <strong><span style="color: red">I will instill terror into the hearts of the Unbelievers: smite ye above their necks and smite all their finger-tips off them." </span></strong>[Allah is really most merciful] </font></p>
<p align="justify" class="articletext"><font face="Verdana">Holy Quran, as we read, is full of heinous, inhuman, and utterly dreadful cruel verses.  The main themes of Quranic or scriptural instruction are: <strong><span style="color: red">pursuance by advice, then by intimidation/coercion, then by force (killing, fighting, maiming etc), and in return plenty of heavenly reward from Allah.</span></strong>  We can find hundreds of cruel hateful and utterly inhuman verses throughout the Quran. The above Quranic scriptures incited early Muslim Jihadis of 7<sup>th</sup> century period to kill thousands of non-Muslims and other infidels. During the early period of Islam, especially during Islamic expeditions by Prophet Muhammad himself while he was in Medina, thousands of infidels were brutally killed (beheaded) by the Jihadis. These same Quranic verses may still inciting devout/fanatical Muslims of modern days. </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Now, does it take a rocket scientist to understand the source of the fanatical will of those September 11 terrorists?  Does it ring the bell from where these Islamic terrorists (all over the world) getting their inspiration and hope?  Will our Islamists still say, "Islam is a religion of peace," or that "Qur'an is full of kind and compassionate advises?" Quran tells us to: "not to make friendship with Jews and Christians" (5:51), fight them "until they pay the Jizya (a penalty tax for the non-Muslims living under Islamic rules) with willing submission, and feel themselves subdued" (9:29).  "kill the disbelievers wherever we find them" (2:191), "murder them and treat them harshly" (9:123), "fight and slay the Pagans, seize them, beleaguer them, and lie in wait for them in every stratagem" (9:5), <strong><span style="color: red">" kill and be killed; i.e. commit suicide to kill kaffirs </span></strong>"(9:111). </font></p>
<p align="justify" style="punctuation-wrap: simple"><font face="Verdana">However, Quran a holy book which is replete with contradictions also contains rare deceptive verses like the following:</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quran-4:29-30<strong>:</strong> O ye who believe! Eat not up your property among yourselves in vanities: But let there be amongst you Traffic and trade by mutual good-will: in <strong>Nor kill</strong> <strong>(or destroy) yourselves</strong>: for verily Allah hath been to you Most Merciful!  If any do that rancor and injustice,- soon shall We cast them into the Fire: And easy it is for Allah. </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><a name="005.032" title="005.032"></a><em>Quran-5:32</em><em>-</em> On that account: We ordained for the Children of Israel that <strong>if any one slew a person - unless it be for murder or for spreading mischief in the land - it would be as if he slew the whole people: and if any one saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life of the whole people.</strong> Then although there came to them Our messengers with clear signs, yet, even after that, many of them continued to commit excesses in the land.</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Hypocritical Islamists try to use theses (only) two verses above to make an excuse that Allah forbade suicide killing for Muslims, or killing people. Truly, these verses (4:29-30) above only talking about self-destruction (suicide) for no real purpose other than self depression or pains which sometimes human prefers to end his life in order to get relief from pains. This kind of self-killing is prohibited by any religions, society or creeds and is called self-destruction (suicide) without having any ulterior motive or purpose. But this universal suicide has nothing to do with Allah's call of <span style="color: red">"kill and be killed"</span> (Quranic verse-9:111) with the divine purpose (to kill infidels) of serving Allah, as the verse has clearly stated. And the verse (5:32) is purely a deceptive verse used by most hypocrites of Islam to fool the Westerners. This verse was meant to describe historical aspects of Israelites and is nothing to do with the Muslims. Nor does this verse do any abrogation of the hundreds of killing verses came afterwards (while in Medina) to incite random killings (Jihad) of any un-believers by Allah's soldiers called Muslims. In short holy Quran could be named (undoubtedly) as the supreme manual of intimidation, vengeance, terror, violence, and war against non-Muslims.</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><strong>Profile of the Islamic Terrorists</strong>:</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Osama Bin Laden (OBL) and his al-Qaeda jihadis have frequently cited many passages from the Holy Quran to justify their flagrant acts of terrorism around the world. Suicide bombing is the most successful weapon to strike terror in the hearts of the western infidels. In his famous 'fatwa' of declared war against Americans in 1998, terrorist leader OBL has repeatedly used jihadi verses from the Quran (mentioned in this essay) to incite his followers to kill Americans/infidels primarily by the act of suicide bombing. All the 9/11 Islamic terrorists left their private notes (especially Muhammad Ata) citing Quranic killing verses and they <strong><span style="color: red">all committed suicide to kill American infidels (Kaffirs) 100% according to the Quranic verss-9:111. </span></strong>Not a single time they have ever claimed or mentioned any hadiths as the inciting agent of their killing spree. Israel have had captured numerous would be suicide bombers (who's detonating did not work in their attempt of suicide bombing) with the suicide belt around them, and they all were interviewed by the western reporters in the Israeli prison cell.  All most all of them told the reporters-they wanted to die to kill infidels according to the Quranic instructions to achieve heavenly pleasures with 72 virgin houris. None has ever mentioned anything about hadiths or Sharia laws as their instigator. </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">All the Islamic terrorists arrested by police in Europe (especially in Netherlands such as Van Gogh killing) readily cited Quran as their teacher to commit terrorism in order to kill infidels. In the train terrorism incident at Madrid (Spain) the Islamic terrorists were all longtime resident of Spain (North American and Syrian born) who admitted to police that they were <strong>"inspired by the doctrines (Koran) of Islam"</strong> to rise up against their adopted host country to kill 191 Spanish innocent citizen.   </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Recently, in Bangladesh (<em>a newly infested nation by Islamic jihadis</em>) has experienced an epidemic of bomb blasts by Islamic terrorists of Bangladeshi variety including scores of suicide bombings to kill judges in the various court premises.  In such process of suicide bombing attempts, two have been captured by the police. When asked by the reporters why they were going to kill people by suicide method, they have answered: <strong>"We were doing it by the order of Quranic instructions by Allah". </strong> When Bangladesh terrorist leader Maulana Shaikh Rahman and Bangla Bhai have been captured by the police, Maulana Shaikh Rahman said: <strong>"We have done it to establish Allah's laws in Bangladesh and we were doing it according to the Quran."</strong> Showing one copy of Quran in his hand, he (Maulana) said: <strong>"If I am a terrorist, then Quran also a terrorist"</strong>. <strong><span style="color: red">What could be the more clear evidence that Islamic terrorists are directly getting incitement and encouragement from the holy Quran?</span></strong><span style="color: red"> </span></font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">More recently, the 20<sup>th</sup> hijacker of 9/11 terrorism Zacaria Moussaoui proudly declared in the court: <strong>"I wish I could kill more Americans, because my religion Islam (which is of course Quran) demands that I kill infidels.</strong>"  Zacaria Moussaoui or any other Islamic terrorists never told that they have been incited by the teaching of ahadiths or Sharia laws alone. In fact, all most all Sharia laws are rooted to the Quran and supported by hadiths.  </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Point to ponder that life is invaluable and extremely precious to every human (Rich, poor, young, old, sick or even handicapped) and no one wants to die in vain without any real purpose or gains. Only a superior/divine lustful hopes and inspiration due to brainwashing can trigger somebody to take his/her life. Islamic terrorists are definitely inspired by such lustful afterlife. Palestinian young boys and girls of 12-16 do not die just for revenge or to free their motherland. They definitely have the vision of Islamic heavenly pleasures (due to brainwashing) which inspire them to wear a deadly suicide belt around their young and tender bodies. Quran is readily available almost in every house of Muslims in general, but books of Hadiths are very rarely available to the ordinary Muslims. General Muslims do not get motivation from the Hadiths, because they do not get chance to read hadiths. Besides, Muslims do not take hadith as seriously as Quranic dictums, and to do something as serious as killing innocent people in exchange (suicide) of own life Muslims surely need Quranic instructions; and for that reason Quran has plenty of it.   </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><strong>Are all the suicide bombings same?</strong>  </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Islamic apologists often argue that suicide bombings for the cause of freedom fighting committed not only by the Muslims, but by many other nations (Tamil, Jews, and Japanese Kamakazies) committed suicide bombings for their own freedom struggle.<span style="color: blue"> </span>According to them, Muslims are committing suicide today for their freedom struggle. Therefore, suicide bombings by Muslim youths have nothing to do with Islam! Most prudent question can be asked here: <strong>Are all those past suicide bombings same as Islamic suicide bombings today? Are their pattern same? Let us examine:   </strong></font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Those so called Tamil Tiger, Jews or Japanese Kamakazis may have used technique of suicide bombings very rarely as their desperate quest only to free their own motherland, and their suicide acts were absolutely limited to their own land targeting soldiers, leaders and not innocent civilians. Tamil, Jews, Kamakazies or IRA never blasted bombs in other countries outside their own geographic boundary; they only primarily did blast bombs within their own border. Rarely, isolated single bomb in the vicinity of their border, such as Tamil's killing Razib Ghandi for his support of Sri Lankan Government. But they never ever came to America, Britain, Spain, Indonesia, Tanzania, Uganda, Yemen, Saudi Arabia etc. to blast suicide bombs inside restaurants, bus, train, metro, ocean beaches, tourist resorts etc. None of those above did suicide bombings throughout the whole world globally like those Islamists vigorously doing it today.  How many Tamil blasted suicide bomb in Europe or America?  Was there any global jihadi phenomenon of suicide bombings by Tamil Tigers like those Islamists? </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><strong>Social injustice and poverty! </strong></font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Some moderate or so called moderate Muslims, some leftists, and also some ignorant non-Muslims and politically correct (PC) westerners often try to give reasons for Islamic terrorism as follows: These people do not believe that the religion of Islam has anything to do with the today's Islamic terrorists' mayhem. They bring some ridiculous theory such as poverty, illiteracies, social injustice and oppressions by the majorities (in non-Muslim majority nations like India and all western nations in which Muslims are minority and immigrants) are the main causes of Islamic terrorism. Poverty, social injustice or illiteracies are not the problem of only Muslims. In many South Asian and African nations there are also millions of non-Muslims who are also illiterate, desperately poor, socially oppressed etc. etc.; but how many of them do suicide terrorism? Why none of the non-muslim immigrants in the western nations never have problems like Muslim immigrants, never have to commit suicide or any form of terrorism? Who can answer these questions? These folks also try to bring Palestine-Israeli or Kashmiri problems to justify Islamic terrorism; as if, Palestine-Israeli and Kashmir problems are very newly started. Both of these problems (Palestine and Kashmir) have started almost 70 years back but the world never saw such madness of  Islamic jihadi terrorism until Osam bin-Laden's jihad has started in 1998 right after the victory of Afghan Mujahideen over the Russian infidels. I hope nobody can deny this truth!</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><strong>Iraq and Afghanistan war!</strong></font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Islamists also now telling us that those Muslim youths blasting their jihadi suicide bombs only to take revenge for Iraq war. As if, before Iraq war Islamic jihadis were very sober, gentle and were sitting idle.  May I ask why those Islamic jihadis were blasting bombs relentlessly at US military camps in Saudi Arabia , American Embassies in Tanzania , Uganda , Pakistan , Nairobi and elsewhere, much before Iraq war?  Why they killed more than 3000 innocent civilians in WTC? Why they bombed US ship at Yemen?  Why they bombed US barrack at Beirut?  Was their Iraq war then?  </font></p>

<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><strong>
<strong>Conclusion</strong></strong></font>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Quite obviously, the cause of Islamic fanaticism, zealotry and suicide terrorism is rooted in the <strong>Holy Quran (9:111; 3:169; 4:74; 4:95).</strong> Terrorists like Osama bin Laden and others are the victims of Quranic scriptural immoral teachings. They believe Quran by their hearts and try to follow the Quran in Toto! But the general born Muslims do not follow Quran at all, and that is why they believe in their own peaceful illusionary vision of Islam, which never existed in the history of Islam. </font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">However, the zeal of Islamic fanaticism could have energized by the Middle East Political situation of Palestine and Israel. But this has also much to do with their inherent hatred towards Jews and other non-Muslims which they have acquired <u>primarily</u> from the teachings of Quran and some supports from hadiths in the Madrassas in their early lives.</font></p>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana">Osama bin Laden is the true Muslim who follows Quran and hadiths in 'Toto' and this hero of Muslim interprets Quranic verses and hadiths as per the needs of Islamic Umma, and of course, as per the real spirit of medieval Islam. In fact, gullible Muslims consider OBL as the mirror image of Prophet Muhammad and many things about him (OBL) are 100% compatible with the life and deeds of Islamic prophet Muhammad. That is why true Muslims (Maulanas, Mullahs, Madrassa students [Talibans], all leaders of Islamic political parties) of Pakistan, Bangladesh, Indonesia, and other Muslim countries are supporting Osama and his host, Talibans of Afghanistan. It's totally irrelevant and useless to claim that Osama, al-Qaeda terrorists and Talibans are not true Muslims, or they are Muslims by their distorted views of Islam! Actually, <strong><u>they are the real Muslims</u></strong>, and they are <strong><u>the Muslims by the book</u></strong>. All others so called progressive Muslims (living in the western comfort) are simply Muslims <strong><u>by virtue of their birth in a Muslim family</u></strong>.</font></p>
<p align="justify" class="articletext"><font face="Verdana">Time has arrived now to identify and intervening the real cause of this ancient medieval stupidity. Real problem is with the ancient Bedouin teachings of Islam <strong>(read Quran) </strong>which are outdated and no longer fitting the today's civilized world. Islamic terrorism is the giant problem of entire mankind today and fanatic Muslims are the zombies at the hands of immoral Quranic teachings. <strong>How can one</strong> <strong>cure a body by keeping the cancerous lesion inside the body?</strong> Nothing can change this precarious situation of Muslims unless we realize the real problem (<strong>read Quran</strong>) and take care of it. Finally, let me close this essay by a famous quotation.</font></p>

<blockquote>
<p align="justify"><font face="Verdana"><strong><span style="color: red">"Religion is an insult to human dignity.  With or without it, you would have good people doing good things and evil people doing evil things.  But for good people to do evil things, that takes religion</span></strong><span style="color: red">."--</span><span style="color: blue"> <em><strong>by Nobel Laureate physicist Steven Weinberg</strong></em>:  </span></font></p>
</blockquote>
<strong>
<strong>Literatures:</strong></strong>
<p style="margin-left: 0.25in; text-indent: -0.25in">1.   The Holy Qur'an, Translated by A. Yousuf Ali, Published by Amana Corporation, Brentwood, Maryland, 1983</p>
<p style="margin-left: 0.25in; text-indent: -0.25in">2.   Holy Qur'an, Translated in Bengali by Ahmadiya Muslim Centenary Publication of Bangladesh, 4 Bakshi Bazar road, Dhaka, 1992</p>
<p class="MsoNormal">3.  Holy Qur'an, Bengali translation by Maulana Muhiuddin khan, Khademu Harmain  </p>
<span style="font-size: 12pt; font-family: Times New Roman">     Sharifain, Saudi Arabia, Madina Mannwara, 1413 Hijri.</span>

<hr />Syed Kamran Mirza was born in a Muslim family of Bangladesh. After having Ph.D. in Biological science he worked as a teacher in one of the reputed Universities in Bangladesh for a period of 12 years, now lives in USA. He is the author of the book, "Roots of Islamic Terrorism" published in 2004. And also authored more than 200 articles scrutinizing in various aspects of Islam, some of which have been published in the reputed journals. He can be reached at <a href="mailto:Mirza.syed@gmail.com">Mirza.syed@gmail.com</a>
