---
Title: Evolutionary Science vs. Creation Theory, and Intellectual Hypocrisy!
Tags:
  - mukto-mona
  - evolution
  - islam
  - darwin day celebration
  - darwin day
  - creation vs evolution
  - celebration
  - Syed Kamran Mirza
Published: 2009-02-12 15:26:38 +06:00
Updated: 2009-07-15 07:18:09 +06:00
OldURL: 2009/02/12/evolutionary-science-vs-creation-theory-and-intellectual-hypocrisy/
---

<p class="MsoNormal" align="center"><strong><span style="font-size: 20pt; color: #008000;">Evolutionary Science vs. Creation Theory, and Intellectual Hypocrisy! </span></strong></p>
<p style="margin: 0.05pt 0in;" align="center"> </p>
<p style="margin: 0.05pt 0in;" align="center"><span style="font-size: medium; color: #000080;">Syed Kamran Mirza</span></p>
<p style="margin: 0.05pt 0in;" align="center"><a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" href="mailto:Mirza.syed@gmail.com">Mirza.syed@gmail.com</a></p>
<p style="margin: 0.05pt 0in;"> </p>
<p style="margin: 0.05pt 0in;"><span style="font-size: 14pt; color: red;"> </span></p>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;"><span style="font-size: 14pt; color: red;">F</span>or thousands of years, scientists were searching answer to the mystery of biological origin in our own planet Earth, because scientists could not quite swallow religious folklore stories of "Creation Theory" fed by various ancient Prophets. Then came the greatest human being ever walked on the surface of this earth. His name was Charles R. Darwin a naturalist, and was born in England on February 12, 1809. The greatest scientist Charles Darwin gave mankind the revolutionary and most acceptable theory of creation called "Evolution Theory". Darwin explained his theory: <strong>"On the origin of species</strong>" in 1859, detailing the theory of evolution of biological world by the process of variation, reproduction and natural selection. Evolution established the fact that life has a long history of change over time and different groups of species share common ancestor. For example, human beings, chimpanzees, and gorillas evolved from a common ancestor that lived between 4 to 10 million years ago, while the common ancestor of human beings and reptiles lived about 300 million years ago, and so on.<span style="color: blue;"> </span>It was from Darwin's evolutionary theory from which scientists later concluded how simple organic and inorganic materials might have formed early primordial soup to give rise single cell organism deep under the sea; and how humans and all other animals were evolved from one basic life form by millions of years of evolutionary process from the single cell. Darwin's evolution theory was a dangerous idea of creation boldly opposing century old hypothesis of God and religious creationism. Evolution totally annihilated the theory of "Adam" and put "Apes" in the family tree of humans. </span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">Evolution is the greatest triumphs of human discovery. Evolution is not a peripheral subject but the central organizing principle of both biological and cosmological science today. Almost 98% of world biologists and also other scientists believe in evolution theory, because Darwin's evolution theory is the only acceptable theory to explain the origin of life on earth. Besides, entire biological phenomena are only compatible with Darwin's evolution theory and not compatible with the religious creation theory at all. Evolution is as well documented as any phenomenon in science, as strongly as the Earth's revolution around the sun rather than vice versa. Therefore, we can call evolution a "Fact". Today's biological sciences are directly propagating on the basis of evolution theory of Charles Darwin. Without believing in evolution one can not understand and agree with the modern miracles of biomedical science. The revolution of modern biomedical science and also biological field in general can only be understood and realized on the basis of evolutionary process.<span style="color: blue;"> </span> [For detail on evolution please read here: <a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolution">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolution</a>]</span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">Can we have our faith both on religion as well as on science, at the same time? I believe it is not possible to put our strong faith in religious folklores and also in scientific facts! Because, religion and science are like oil and water—one can not mix with the others. More precisely, can anybody believe in orthodoxy of religion and also believe in Darwin's evolution? How can one believe in "evolution theory" and also believe in "creation theory"? To me it is utterly impossible to have true faith on both!</span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">In this 21<sup>st</sup> century period of great triumphant in science, the era of computer and rockets, we still can find many believing scientists; especially, amongst the Muslims these very believing scientists are plenty and abundant in number. I wonder how these believing scientists can cope with their belief both in science and religion! I have seen many Muslim born scientists working in the scientific laboratories, doing research on biological and cosmological fields—yet they are strong believers in Islam. I have no clue how they could preserve their faith in religion. Out of my sheer curiosity, I had asked several of my friends who were working as doctors, research scientists in biological and chemical laboratories. When I asked them if they believe in Darwin's evolution theory; they replied yes! When asked about the religious creation theory; they all remained silent. Then they tried to make some futile arguments that evolution theory does not really contradict religious creation theory! I told them that, this is their utter dishonesty. Dear readers, please bear with me, I will explain my logic, as to, why I am calling them dishonest and intellectual hypocrites. </span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>What is the biological origin of our world?</strong></span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>(A) Creation of Religions!</strong></span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">For hundreds of thousands of years, mankind was wondering about their origin and destination—where they came from, and where they are going after their death. They were wondering about their surroundings, mysterious universe—sky, stars, sun, moon, days and nights, deaths, diseases, sorrows, and happiness, but they had no clue what and how everything was happening. Then, ancient people created some religions by their imaginations; their main ingredients of creating religions were—existence of soul, fear and superstitions. They created their respective God, Angels Satan, hell, heavens, etc. They made these personal gods 'readily talkative' just like human. Many of these Gods such as Jewish Zehuba, Christian God, and especially Allah of Islam is like super-human—can talk, can see, feel, and get terribly angry if followers do not worship, gets happy if they worship Him and promises them some absurd lustful things in the heaven; and threatens them with dreadful hell punishments. Islamic Allah even has His decorative super throne established somewhere in the sky in which He is sitting surrounded by His arch Angel Gabriel and other deputies of the flocks of innumerous brigades of Angels. Creators of these imaginary Gods also created some so called Prophets like <strong>Moses, Jesus and Muhammad</strong>. God used to converse regular basis with these so called Prophets like a big Boss talking with His employees and His (God) talks were the source of Books like: Torah, Bible, and Koran. </span>

<strong><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Religious Creation Theory</span></strong><span style="font-family: Verdana;">—is the pure blind faith with no proof or logic that, a super "intelligent designer" (God, Allah, Zehuba, Baghban, etc) has created human from wet clay or mud, shaped man as His own image and gave soul inside the dummy human by blowing spirit from His holy mouth—and that man was Adam—the first human. God also created a woman "Hawa"  or "Eve" from the ribs of first human "Adam" and these two human—Adam and Hawa were the source of entire human race today. Rest of everything on earth was made simply by saying: "BE" or "Happen" by the wish of mighty GOD. According to religion, everything begun just 6-7 thousand years ago. As per Biblical genesis—everything on earth were created by only 6 days. There were no transformations, metamorphosis or change, everything begun as it is, exactly what we can see now in the present time. <span style="text-decoration: underline;">Examples:</span> first human (Adam) was exactly the same what we are now, first tiger was the same, first cow was the same etc. etc.  </span><span style="font-family: Verdana;">All theories of these religions are only a blind belief in unseen, unproven, illogical, and full of ridiculous superstitions and bunch of contradictions between them. There was no scope of proving or verification, no scientific basis of experimentation and validation to these superstitious folklore stories of all various religions in the whole world.</span>

<strong><span style="font-family: Verdana;">(B) S</span><span style="font-family: Verdana;">cientific Creation Theory</span></strong><span style="font-family: Verdana;">—</span><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Darwin's Theory of biological origin<strong><span style="color: blue;">, </span></strong></span><span style="font-family: Verdana;">which is known as "Evolution Theory<strong>"</strong> has been widely accepted by all scientists. According to the evolution theory—the creator is called "NATURE" or "MOTHER NATURE" and not any personal God like religious God or so called "intelligent designer". This is the only accepted scientific version of creation of life on Earth. Entire biological science is firmly standing on the shoulder of evolution theory today. <span style="text-decoration: underline;">In brief</span>: Evolution theory believes that, life (unicellular) was originated from the original chemical constituents of oceanic atmosphere (primordial soup) and by changes for billions of years. The unicellular stage of life remained for almost 3.5 billion years and multicellular life originated from the single cell only during the last 600 million years ago. It was from multicellular organism higher animal kingdom arose, and large animals like dinosaurs arose only 250 million years ago, and dinosaurs were destroyed by meteor-storms some 65 million years ago. And mammalian species came after that from which human species was evolved about 3-6 million years ago, as the descendant from animal world.  First human was not like us and they were more like Apes </span><span style="font-family: Verdana;">(<em>Homo Erectus</em>, <em>Neanderthal</em> <em>and transitional types</em> <em>between</em> <em>Neanderthal</em> <em>and modern man</em>)</span><span style="font-family: Verdana;"> and by gradual evolutionary changes—modern humans have been finally evolved<span style="color: blue;">.  </span></span>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>Biological Evolution in brief: </strong></span></p>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">The basic idea of biological evolution is that all life on Earth shares a common ancestor of prehistoric origin, just as me and my cousins share a common grandmother. Through the gradual process of descent with modification, the common ancestor of life on Earth gave rise to the enormous diversity of species that we see around us today; and mankind gathered this knowledge only through the painstaking researches with the fossil records by many archeologists and biologists around the world. Evolution means that we're all distant cousins: humans, apes, and oak trees, hummingbirds and whales. The key fact of evolution is that life has a long history — it has changed over time — and that different species share common ancestors. Evolution in biological world<span lang="EN"> are caused by a combination of three main processes: variation, reproduction, and natural selection.<span style="color: blue;"> </span></span>Natural selection is one of the basic mechanisms of evolution, along with mutation, migration, and genetic drift. Most importantly, <strong>"survival of the fittest</strong>" is the basic <em>mantra</em> of Darwin's evolution.  Darwin discovered the revolutionary theory of evolution that has changed the entire course of science and society for ever. [Please read about Darwin's evolution in detail here<span style="color: maroon;">: </span><a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" href="https://evolution.berkeley.edu/">https://evolution.berkeley.edu/</a> ] </span>
<p style="background: white; line-height: 14.4pt;"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>Flawed arguments by believers</strong>!</span></p>
<p style="background: white; line-height: 14.4pt;"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Believing scientists and western educated Muslims mullahs have a common erroneous notion of critiquing Darwin's evolution theory on the basis of their uneducated argument like: "how man could have originated from Monkey, yet we still have monkey around us!" This is totally wrong perception by those believing scientists/educated folks, and they are doing it only to preserve their blind-faith on religion. Evolution theory did not say that at all. Evolution theory only said that—Primates (Humans and Apes, Chimpanzees, etc) originated from one prehistoric ancestor, period. Scientists discovered that, Chimpanzees and people possess almost identical sets of genes, so the genes that have changed down the human lineage also hold the key to what makes people human. The comparison should pinpoint the genetic differences that have arisen in the two species since they split from a common ancestor some six million years ago. This is the key of Darwin's evolution theory of biological world today. </span></p>
<p style="background: white; line-height: 14.4pt;"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Before Darwin's revolutionary theory of evolution—species were not linked in a single "family tree". They were unconnected, unrelated and unchanged since the moment of their creation. And Earth itself was thought to be so young—perhaps only 6,000 years old—that there would not have been time for species to change. In any case, people were not part of the natural world; they were above and outside of it! This wrong perception was originated primarily from religious belief system. </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>Cosmological evolution: (Copernican principle)!</strong></span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Evolution theory also fits very well for cosmological world. Like biological world, our cosmological universe also underwent enormous courses of evolution; and in fact, evolutionary changes are happening even now continuously. Many stars are dying and new stars are forming, many other changes and strange things are happening in the cosmos and most importantly, the universe is expanding constantly. I have no scope of describing cosmological evolution in this short article. Therefore, I will try to give a very brief encounter of evolutionary changes of our own planet earth only. </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">What is Big-bang theory?</span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"><span lang="EN"> </span></span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"><span lang="EN">The Big Bang theory (suggested by Friedman and Lemaître) is the only popularly believed cosmological model of the universe which is well supported by all lines of scientific evidence and observation. According to Big Bang theory the universe is expanding from a primordial hot and dense initial condition at some finite time in the past and expanding continuously to this day. </span><span lang="EN-GB">Moreover, Big Bang in Physics refers to the explosion of SPACE-TIME SINGULARITY (not matter). Matter was not even created when Big Bang happened approximately 15 Billion years ago. Earth was formed billions of years after the Big Bang by sheer cosmic evolutionary process.</span></span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">[Wikepedia: <a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Bang">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Bang</a>]</span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Even our earth was also formed through series of very complex cosmic evolutionary changes. Just a few centuries ago, entire mankind believed Almighty God created this Earth by 6 or 8 days simply by His mighty order "Be" and it happened. Earth was flat and fixed at the middle of the universe (<em>of course, to the billions of gullible believers, it is still flat and situated at the center</em>) Sun and Moon rotates daily to cause day and night on this fixed earth (<strong>Koranic and Biblical strong belief</strong>) which is known as: Geo-centric cosmology. But only hand counted a few humans like Copernicus, Galileo did believe 180 degree reverse. Copernican principle has changed century old Geo-centric religious cosmological theory to a rock-solid scientifically proven theory of Helio-centric cosmology. World knows very well how a few great scientists like Copernicus, Brno, Keplar and Galileo completely changed thousands years old scriptural dictums, and how Galileo suffered wraths from Vatican Pope.  Finally, Copernicus and Galileo moved our earth from center to the periphery of the universe; as Charles Darwin gave us the most acceptable theory of the "origin of species" which has explained how human was descent from the animal world by series of evolutionary process. <strong><span style="color: red;"> </span></strong>How can any modern human do believe in "Geo-centric cosmology" (Religious) instead of believing in "Helio-centric cosmology" (Science)? </span></p>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>Evolution of our planet earth in brief: </strong>Scientists were never satisfied with the religious folklore stories of cosmology and they agreed with the Big-bang theory of cosmological evolution. Evolutionary steps (on the basis of fossil records)<span style="color: maroon;"> </span>of our Planet Earth can be summarized as follows: Our cosmological universe is about 15 Billion years old. But our planet earth is about 4.5 Billion years old. Earth underwent innumerous changes and metamorphosis for billions of years. Initial stage was a big molten fire ball because of continuous bombardments of millions of meteorites from the outer space and it took millions of years to cool down and was covered with water for millions of years; and then covered with ice and vise-versa for millions of years. And then, at about 3.5 Billions years ago—super continent "<em>Rodenia</em>" was formed and at the same period—first life preameba like single cell organism was formed deep under the sea from primordial soup which later formed fossilized mats of cyanobacteria called stromatolites which is going to be our great ancestor and the origin of future life on earth; life still remained under the deep sea. About 2.2 Billion years ago oxygen was plenty from oceanic algae and supercontinent "<em>Rodenia</em>" was broken into five continents, by the movement of tectonic plates, and ice age came again and covered the whole world. Ice-age was over again and ocean was blue by oxygen formation and again ice-age covered the earth destroying everything over the earth and only life under the sea survived. These repetition of changes continued until 700 million years ago, when life (algae) began to flourish again under the sea with the formation of plenty of oxygen, green vegetables, tree, lush green, oxygen formed tremendous amount, greenery and tiny bacterial growth still continued under the ocean. </span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">Ice age started again and most life was perished and ice age ended 650 million years ago. About 630 millions years ago—vegetations on earth bloomed again. About 500 million years ago, plant-life exploded with sweltering high level of oxygen. At about 450 million years ago, new super continent "<em>Great Panzia</em>" was formed again and green algae formed under the sea. Modern atmosphere, ozone layers started to form, life mostly bacteria and green algae still remained under the water. About 400 millions years ago, <strong>life came to the shore due to</strong> excess oxygen and formation of ozone layer to protect life on the land. About 300 million years ago, entire world become a tropical swamp, lots of plants and greens vegetations, various biological life bombarded and, various types of multicellular life formed, Ozone layers were much thicker.  About 250 million years ago, again started myriads volcanic eruptions and bombardment of meteors which destroyed everything that was formed and 95% of earth biology was destroyed again. </span>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">About 240 million years ago, again oxygen and various life forms evolved, muticellular large animals evolved, <strong>dinosaurs</strong> evolved and plenty of lust green dense forest developed as a result oxygen formation increased tremendously and more new modern life were formed. About 180 million years ago, due to tectonic movements super continent "<em>Great Panzia"</em> broke again and separated <strong>forming five 5 different continents</strong>. Fossil records indicated that about 100 million years ago, Dinosaurs ruled the entire earth. 75 million years ago, frequent volcanic eruptions and ashes made the land more fertile, big plants, lush green everything greatly flourished, then 65 million years ago—came the meteor rains and 95% of life was extinct along with all the dinosaurs and <strong>Era of dinosaurs was gone.</strong></span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"> </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">About 50 million years ago, life slowly started to evolve again and first mammal started to flourish, different mammalian life flourished, continents changed, earthquake, volcanoes erupted, many mountains formed, Himalayan formed, Swiss Alps formed by collision between two continents—Africa and Europe.  Lands become very fertile, plants and various vegetations grown vigorously, giving enormous amount of oxygen. About 2-6 million years ago, early ape-like Humans were evolved from mammals in Kenya, Africa. Early humans were spread to Europe, Asia from African continent. Ice age formation is continuous and ice age came and gone. Ice-age were happened repeatedly every 10-15 thousands years apart; civilization destroyed and again new civilization was formed from the remnants of the past. Gaps between ice age were 10-15 thousands years and present human civilization is about 10,000 years old.</span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"> </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">I have narrated the above very complex and lengthy evolutionary process of our planet earth only to show how silly, laughable, and incredibly wrong religious creation theory is!  During the entire 4.5 Billions years, the incredible journey of our planet earth determined which life will survive or which life will be perished (<em>Survival of the fittest</em>). Next ice age will come after 15,000 years and everything on earth will be destroyed. Scientists predict that after about 200 million years from now, our planet earth will again form super continent by tectonic movements. Deadly turmoil will happen and mass extinction of all species will occur.</span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"> </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">After 2 billion years from now, our planet earth will loose its fire power (heat) the source of all power will be gone, and the earth will be dead planet like the planet Mars. Human civilization may totally gone or some believe that mankind by it's superior intelligence will discover technology by which they will leave this planet for a distant better planet to make it a new home and life will flourish again! [<em>Source: How life began on earth: earliest history of earth and how it evolved to support varied life; History Chan-120; Tribune Media Service]</em></span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"><em><span style="color: red;"> </span></em></span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>Problem of religious creation theory! </strong></span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"> </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">If we believe Quranic creation theory, or Biblical genealogy then, the age of this whole universe is less than five thousands year old, and not 4.5 billion years old! Islamic scriptures say that Allah has created this heaven and earth, from nothingness, within six days and after that He created Adam, the first human being; and Prophet Muhammad was the 90th descendant of Adam. According to calculation, considering 30 years to be the age difference between two successive generations, Allah created this heaven and earth only 4,137 years ago. Even, we consider a very liberal calculation of Biblical genealogy with clear perceptions from Adam (First human) to Jesus, and from there we can easily make up where lies the position of Prophet Muhammad; the age of this universe (which is merely earth and sun, moon and stars according to religion, because Allah could not see<span style="color: blue;"> </span>anything else in the cosmos!) can not be more than 6000 years, period. We can see how ridiculous this religious theory against scientific theory?<span style="color: blue;">  </span>On the contrary, geological experts say that the earth is more than 4.5 billion years old. </span></p>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">Islamists tend to argue that Koran did not specify any time-line for this universe; but they can never deny that Muhammad came after 500 years of Jesus, and rest is in Bible. So no excuse because the erratic book called Koran never gave any time-frame. Koran also did not tell that this universe is millions of years old. Koran is a book having no chronology, no chapters, ample redundancies, and many irregularities and myriads of scientific errors and contradictions. Koran did not tell about age because Koran was copied from various religions and made up from ancient folklores and superstitions. Can you imagine existence of Gins? This was folklore belief in Arabia much before Islam. So, how anybody can expect any real time-frame of this universe from the Koran? </span>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>How believing scientists behave with the evolution!</strong></span></p>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">Some western religionists and also many Islamists (believing scientists) often try to ridicule about evolution in order to protect the obvious fallacies of the creation theory of religion. Most Islamists and orthodox religionists of other religions are also trying to discard evolution theory; but interestingly, some smart but ardently believing scientists' even attempt with their futile explanations that religious creation theory in fact correctly matches with the evolution theory! This is of course a hypocrisy and totally impossible and weird dream by those Islamists. Non-muslim western believing scientists usually remain silent about this double standard. These believing scientists pretend to believe in creation theory as long as they stay at home and inside the Churches and Mosques; but in their laboratories, they of course believe in Darwin evolution theory! Believing scientists and all Mullahs are the champion hypocrites in this mortal world. Because, they think about God, they believe in God, and say always that their 'life and death' depends only in God's/Allah's hands, but when gets sick then they immediately run to the doctor or hospital, and after getting cured by the doctor, they claim Allah cured them and they thank only Allah! What a hypocrisy! </span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">Problem with the so called believing scientists is that, they would like to mix religious theory with that of evolution theory, which is their double standard. Religion had been at odds with science, still is at odds, and it will remain so until all religions would take demise from this mortal world. This is pure and simple. Now, to compete with science, every religionists searching science in their own scriptures with a massive magnifying glass. Islam is the champion in this line. Alas, there could be no science in the scriptures of Islam or in any religion for sure.  Don't we remember that just a few century ago, entire mankind believed that earth is flat, fixed at the center of our universe (Geo-centric cosmology) because they were fed these lies from Bible and Koran? One can not and should not mix religion with science at all! </span>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">For the last 100 years or so, galloping advancement of biological science is purely on the basis of EVOLUTION THEORY OF Darwin and definitely not on the basis of CREATION THEORY of Religion<em>. <strong>Science does not believe in CREATION theory and Religion does not believe in EVOLUTION theory.</strong> </em>Truth is, if Religion wants to mix-up with evolution then, we shall have to consider Adam as Ape-like Neanderthal or Homo-erectus early human having smaller brain, and not a perfect human having all the intelligential qualities, as the Bible or Quran described so eloquently for all believers!  </span></p>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>Personal God or Mother Nature? </strong></span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">Truly, no scientist can believe in any personal God or so called "intelligent designer". Scientists ought to believe or do believe in mighty natural force ( "The Nature" common westerners call it "Mother Nature" and I call it "Natural God")—created by the natural actions on: physical, chemical and gravitational forces of our universe: Sun, Moon, Earth and all other Planets, Waters, Air, Heat, Cold, Oxygen, Hydrogen, Nitrogen, Carbon dioxide, etc etc. This natural God can not talk, can not see or feel, does not have any hatred nor has any love for anything in the universe, do not ask for worshiping, do not care for anything from us, it does independently what it was set to do having no accountability to anybody! For billions of years, it continues to do what it supposed to do without caring for anything in it's path, and we along with all creations are by products and enjoy good things of this force (bounties) and also suffer wraths and destructions of this same force indiscriminately (Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Jews, non-believers all alike, all animals, insects, plants, no body spared). Because natural God do not recognizes any class. We all are just by products of the natural game continued for ever, for billions of years. </span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>Diseases and natural calamities! </strong></span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>As per religions</strong>:  All superstitions and fear mongering nonsense are the products of religions. All the diseases and natural calamities (Tsunami, tornados, Cyclones, earthquake, volcanic eruptions etc)  are God's wraths as the divine punishments (<strong><em>Gazaab</em>) </strong>from Allah, God, Bagabhan or any deity—as all religious books including Koran, Bible, Gita etc deliriously told to ancient mankind. Consider, just a few centuries ago, people were so ignorant about all natural calamities that they could never understood how and why they happened! Religious deities like Allah, God or Bhagabhan etc bragged that they are giving these only to <span style="text-decoration: underline;">punish the sinners.</span> People did not know when rain will fall, when tornado will hit their land. Allah shamelessly bragged in Koran that, "no human will ever know when rain will come or what will be the sex of a baby inside the womb".  Average longevity of humans can not be changed since Allah or God of religions emphatically told in Koran/Bible that it is He who decides—who dies when or how many years or days one human lives etc. That is, human's longevity had been fixed already by Allah; hence it can not be changed by any means. Average human's longevity should remain static for all nations of the whole world since personal God can not do any partiality to any nation. Ancient people were completely helpless and dependant on these ridiculous Gods, unnecessarily died of their ignorance. Just couple of hundreds years back, mankind never knew what causes the diseases in man and animals! Not long ago, plague, cholera, small pox used to eradicates entire population of a village or a town and there was no treatment at all. All religions told mankind that—these were wraths (Al-Gazzab) from Allah/God. </span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>As per science</strong>: We have learned from science that, diseases affecting man and animal kingdom is caused by living organisms (Bacteria, viruses, fungus,  parasites, toxins, etc) and not caused by divine punishments (Gazaab) from Allah, God, Bagabhan or any deity. Humans (<em>not any God</em>) have gathered knowledge about myriads of disease causing agents: almost 5000 different species of viruses, and up to 1 million species of bacteria. They presumably infect all of the 4,500 species of mammals including humans. When exactly any world religion, or any deity ever told about these disease causing agents; could any believing scientist answer this question?  </span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">All calamities on Earth (Earthqake, Volcanoes, Tornados, Cyclone, Floods, Tsunami, Rains, Snows, Blizzards etc etc.) are natural physical and chemical phenomena of Earth's rotations and gravitational force, Sun's heat, water and air—and <span style="text-decoration: underline;">not divine punishments</span> for the sinners, as Koran and Bible deliriously told the ancient followers! Human longevity can definitely be increased and it is increasing every year in the modern world simply by modern improved life style. Just thousand years ago (during 11<sup>th</sup> century period) humans longevity on earth was only 30 years long. Now, average longevity is much higher (78-84) in the developed/western world (like: Sweden, Japan, USA etc) and much lower (41-51) in the poor or underdeveloped Third World nations like Nepal, Somalia, Ethiopia, Bangladesh etc. End of this century—human longevity will reach near 150 years and will keep increasing by the next century by more new discoveries to protect good health and by the miracles of more biomedical discoveries.</span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>Achievements of biomedical science: </strong>Success list is so long that it is not possible to include everything that has been discovered by humans out of scientific innovations. So far mankind solved lots of puzzles about our mysterious universe only by the help of science and will learn about many more puzzles (<em>yet to be solved</em>) with the help of scientific progress in the near future. Especially, mysteries of biological world have been much clear and logical to understand on the basis of Darwin's evolution process. Just 50 to 60 years back medical science was so primitive, changing somebody's heart or eyes were unthinkable and people even did not dream for it. Now human's advancement in science made it quite possible and bio-medical miracles of organ transplantations have made a radical change to the health science, life style, and longevity of mankind. Scientists are now able to make multiple organs transplantation and face transplantation too! Epidemics like Plague, Cholera, small pox etc do not eradicate entire population of a village or town any more!</span>
<p class="MsoNormal" style="margin-bottom: 4pt;"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Now, it is beyond our comprehension what more medical miracles will happen by the next century or two! Test tube baby, Cloning baby, Organ transplantation, Longevity changes, Sex Changes, fertility changes by treatment etc. etc. are some bio-medical miracles readily happening today! We can not expect to believe that the so called "intelligent designer" or God suddenly changed His mind and decided to give 4, 6, or 8 babies to one mother (recent octuplets case in California) or 65 year old lady to give birth baby either. Fertility treatment is making all these miracles possible. </span></p>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">Possibilities are enormous and unlimited. Humans already can create new and modified plants and fruits, or increase of food grains by grafting or selective cross-breeding or animals by cloning or by cross breeding; scientists are able to create a new kind of human or create half-human and half-animal by cloning; and who knows what more miracle humans can create by next several centuries! Humans will create new organs by stem cell research to keep in the laboratory (<em>Organ stores for sale</em>) and people will be able to replace their diseased or dysfunctional<span style="color: red;"> </span>organs with newly built organs and continue to living longer. End of this century—human longevity may reach near 200 years and keep increasing by the next century. </span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;"><span style="color: black;">European scientists have announced pioneering surgery by </span>successful transplantation of a human windpipe using a patient's own <a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" title="Recent and archival health news about stem cells." href="https://topics.nytimes.com/top/news/health/diseasesconditionsandhealthtopics/stemcells/index.html?inline=nyt-classifier"><span style="color: #004276;">stem cells</span></a> to fashion an organ and prevent its rejection by her immune system. That means, scientists are able to create windpipe in the laboratory. Stem cell research will make a revolution of new discoveries in the field of biomedical science in the near future; and possibilities of medical miracles can be seen clearly in the horizon of health science. </span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">According to a study in Chicago, USA, s</span><span class="hd1"><span style="font-weight: normal; font-size: 14.5pt;"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">cientists also getting closer to creating an artificial life in the laboratory. </span></span></span><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Scientists have discovered a more efficient way of building a synthetic genome that could one day enable them to create artificial life. Scientists are also getting close to make artificial blood in the laboratory to use for the surgical patients. Scientists have decoded the chimp genome and compared it with that of humans, a major step toward defining what makes people human and developing a deep insight into the evolution of human sexual behavior. This is just the tip of ice-berg (of scientific miracles) I have mentioned in this article, and what more miracles will come to this world only from scientists (<em>not from any God</em>) is beyond our comprehension. But we all know what religions said about all this!</span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>Discussion: </strong></span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">No personal God (like religious "Intelligent Designer") can create so many deadly disease causing organisms only to give mankind monumental health problems; and so many natural disasters and devastations to cause so much destructions, sorrows, and miseries to His own creations! Nor any so called "intelligent designer" can let happen so much biological abnormalities to His biological kingdom. There is no good reason why any God ("Intelligent designer") will enjoy making: Conjoin babies, Still-born baby, baby with no legs or hands, baby with multiple heads, legs and hands, baby looks like a monster, baby that will survive only a few hours, baby that is going to be a seriously mentally retarded, beautiful baby born with brain tumor or abnormal heart, giving deadly disease like AIDS, and many more human's developmental abnormalities and untold human miseries. Also, no personal God or so called "intelligent designer" would sit idle only to observe billions of starved and disease-infested humans living in sub-human standard and dying unnecessarily in the world today!  </span>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">Had there been any existence of "Intelligent Designer" who controls this universe (the way every religion specified) there could be: (a) no organ transplantation, (b) no test tube baby, (c) no heart surgery, (d) no revival of heart patient by cardiac resuscitation, (e) no longevity changes, (f) no bastard child, (g) no cloning baby, (h) no sex changes, (i) no sperm cells making from the stem cell, (j) no modern manipulations of plants, fruit trees and food grains, etc etc; simply because God/Allah would not let humans (mainly kaffirs) to exploit and play with God's mystery of creation. This would be an utter insult to the God's divine authority! He (God) would simply put an iron-ban on any human manipulations of His biological and cosmological world.</span>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Darwin's evolution theory is the only sensible method of understanding our natural phenomena.<span style="color: red;"> </span>Evolution is a very lengthy process governed by the <strong>nature</strong> and not by <strong>any personal God</strong> of religion; and it is happening every minute, day, month, year and every century continuously. It is not possible to observe this slow process like one can see an apple falling from the tree, or snake walking down the hill etc. One needs to watch it continuously roaming all over the earth just the way Charles Darwin observed it for many years by his meticulous research with the natural world. Most importantly, Darwin's greatest theory of <strong>"Survival of the Fittest"</strong> is unequivocal and uncontroversial, especially for biological world. This theory is undoubtedly true for both plants and animal kingdom. </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"> </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Bacterial and viral mutations to deceive modern antibiotics, changing ecological world around us is vividly evident, and extinctions of many plants and animal species are also evidences of survival of the fittest theory of Darwin's evolution. In 2007, Bangladeshi biologists observed that some riverside's ecology in southern part of the country (Khulna District, adjacent to the Bay of Bengal) has changed completely. Biologists observed that, century long known plants and fruit trees have been extinct and replaced by a whole new generation of new plants and fruit trees, which the local people said they can not identify these new trees and can not find those known trees anymore. Scientists and local people have observed that, this change of ecology has occurred during the last 25-30 years period. Scientists concluded that the increased salinity of the river banks (by sea water) was the main reason of this ecological change. </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"> </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">This kind of ecological changes are evident in many parts of the world and numerous animal species are becoming extinct or totally lost, and in some cases, replaced by new species of threatened animals by adaptation (<em>Mutation</em>) to cope with the changes of ecological environment. Scientists in India discovered a dozen previously unknown species of frogs in the forests of Western Ghats according to a paper published (February 3, 2009) in latest issue of <em>Zoological Journal of Linnean Society, London. </em>Amphibians are one of the most threatened groups of animal species in the world. Every year dozens amphibians (<em>Frogs, salamanders and caecilians</em>) are extinct worldwide due to habitat loss, over-collection as food and for the pet trade, the outbreak of a deadly fungal disease, pollution and pesticides, introduced species, and the effects of climate change. Since 1980 more than 200 species of animals are believed to have gone extinct throughout the world. </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"> </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Fishes and small reptiles living in the hidden water pools inside cave have no eyes, and flowers in arctic land like Alaska can withstand severely freezing cold weather etc, are some of the good examples of the "survival of the fittest" phenomenon. Even in the human world, we can clearly see these competitions of "survival of the fittest theory" working at large, among the various nations, races and creeds.  </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"> </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"><strong>Conclusion:</strong> </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"><span style="color: blue;"> </span></span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Darwin's theory of evolution is standing tall today! Evolution theory is the basis of all biological science and widely accepted by the world's scientific community. We the humanists, secular scientists, strongly believe in evolution or natural God or <strong>"Mother Nature"</strong> and we do not believe in any personal God like Allah, Zehuba or Baghaban. Because, we can find many acceptable explanations and proofs from natural or evolutionary creator by which we can be convinced; but we get no proof at all for any religious claims. Therefore, we do not believe in any personal God or any so called <strong>"intelligent designer</strong>" who always cares for unlimited worshipping from mankind. No scientist can believe in personal God. Great scientists like Einstein never believed in personal God; in fact no scientist in his honesty and sincerity can ever believe in any personal God. Only a few hypocritical scientists still pretend to believe in personal deity at home, but in the laboratory they never can believe in the creation (religious) theory and do believe in evolution theory.</span></p>

<span style="font-family: Verdana;">All religious creation theories are ridiculously superstitious and only a blind belief in unseen, unproven, illogical, and full of contradictions between them. Factually, No God or divine body ever spoke with anybody. Prophetic claims are all false and can not be proven, can not take any challenge of proving; hence, when asked for any proof or verification, immediately starts fighting and killing others to subjugate and to suppress.   Various blind-faith systems of religions have divided entire mankind into several factions, causing endless conflicts, wars and blood sheds, and all kind of miseries on earth—only in the name of their ridiculous personal Gods.  Most of all (the worst thing) all religions try to keep this earth stand-still, no going forward, fossilized in the past and desperately trying to pull the civilized world by the back gear towards ancient time;  especially, Islam is vigorously doing this nonsense to take this civilized world to the darkness of 7<sup>th</sup> century's Paganism and Arab barbarism.  </span>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">World religions could not give any solution to the untold mysteries of our universe at all. Religious theories only brought some ridiculous superstitions and folklore stories. But, persistent and resilient human thirst for knowledge (Science) and human endeavors have brought-forth ample knowledge about our universe; and it is only due to the continuous and painstaking research by the scientists (Geologists, Physicist, Chemists, biologists, Ecologists, Climatologists etc) alone are opening the knots of many mysteries of our universes day by day! </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"> </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;">Science will make belief system in Allah/God totally obsolete soon. All the above mentioned bio-medical miracles are happening only by human manipulations of biological process by new scientific innovations and research. All the above things (mentioned) and more and more scientific miracles will keep happening—because THERE IS NO SUCH THING CALLED "INTELLIGENT DESIGNER" or any personal God who really has any sort of control over the natural or biological world. The miracles of our biological world and all natural phenomena happening around us can only be understood and explained on the basis of Darwin's revolutionary theory of evolution. </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"><span style="text-decoration: underline;"><span style="text-decoration: none;"> </span></span></span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="font-family: Verdana;"><span style="text-decoration: underline;"><span style="text-decoration: none;"> </span></span></span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><strong> </strong></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">References: </span></strong></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="color: blue;"> </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal">1. Big Bang Theory: <a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Bang">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Bang</a></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"> </p>
<p class="MsoNormal">2. Time Magazine: Evolution Vs. Creationism: Up From the Apes.; August 23, 1999</p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="color: #003300;"> </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="color: #003300;">3. THHuxley, <em><a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" href="https://gold.mukto-mona.com/Articles/huxley/islam_big_bang.html">Islam and the "Big Bang": A Refutation</a></em>, Mukto-Mona.</span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"> </p>
<p class="MsoNormal">4. THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE ON THE EARTH<strong>: </strong>A <a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" href="https://www.sciam.com/" target="_blank"><span style="color: windowtext;">SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN</span></a> article.</p>
<p class="MsoNormal">    by Stephen Jay Gould, October, 1994: <span style="color: blue;"><a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" href="https://brembs.net/gould.html">https://brembs.net/gould.html</a></span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"> </p>
<p class="MsoNormal">5. In Chimpanzee DNA, Signs of Y Chromosome's Evolution: By Nicholas Wade:</p>
<p class="MsoNormal">    <span style="color: #333333;">Yerkes National Primate Research Center, via Associated Press; Published: September  </span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="color: #333333;">    1, 2005.</span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"> </p>
<p class="MsoNormal">6. Clinical transplantation of a tissue-engineered airway: By Alan Cowell and Denise</p>
<p class="MsoNormal">    Grady; Published: November 19, 2008:</p>
<p class="MsoNormal">    <span style="color: blue;"><a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" href="https://www.nytimes.com/2008/11/20/health/research/20stemcell.html?_r=2">https://www.nytimes.com/2008/11/20/health/research/20stemcell.html?_r=2</a></span></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"> </p>
<p class="MsoNormal">7. How Life on Earth Began: <a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" href="https://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/20393495/">https://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/20393495/</a></p>
<p style="margin: 0.05pt 0in;"> </p>
<p style="margin: 0.05pt 0in;">8. Scientists get closer to creating artificial life: study at Chicago; <span class="timestamp">December 8,<strong>   </strong>2008</span>  <a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" href="https://www.leaderpost.com/Health/Scientists+closer+creating+artificial+life+study/1047568/story.html">https://www.leaderpost.com/Health/Scientists+closer+creating+artificial+life+study/1047568/story.html</a></p>
<p style="margin: 0.05pt 0in;"> </p>
<p style="margin: 0.05pt 0in;">9. How earth was formed and life began on earth: earliest history of earth and how it evolved to support varied life; History Chan-120; Tribune Media Service, 2008.</p>
<p style="margin: 0.55pt 0in;"> </p>
<p style="margin: 0.55pt 0in;">10. World Book Encyclopedia: Volume 6, page-436-437; world book, Inc; Chicago,  London, Sydney, Toronto; 1992.</p>
<p class="MsoNormal"> </p>
<p class="MsoNormal">11. Scientists discovered 12 new species of frogs in India: <em>Zoological Journal of Linnean Society, London.</em> (February 3, 2009): <span class="bl1"><span style="font-size: 7pt;"><a style="color: blue; text-decoration: underline; text-underline: single;" href="https://news.mongabay.com/2009/0202-frogs_india.html"><span style="font-weight: normal; font-size: 12pt; font-family: Times New Roman;">https://news.mongabay.com/2009/0202-frogs_india.html</span></a></span></span></p>
