input/posts/2009/09-06-destination-mind.md, before:

---
Title: Destination mind
Tags:
  - ravi &amp
  - anoushka shankar - raga anandi kalyan
  - swami shantanand swarasswati
  - nirvana
  - culture
  - society
  - Akbar Hussain
Published: 2009-09-06 05:41:28 +06:00
Updated: 2009-09-06 05:41:28 +06:00
OldURL: 2009/09/06/destination-mind/
---

<span style="font-size: medium; font-family: Garamond;">Sometimes I wonder where is the real beauty is it inside me or outside? Swami Shantanand Swarasswati once came to my off in New York and talked about our mind and music. He said if our mind is inside us and all our thoughts springs from the mind then truly we live in our minds. Fine music is pure honey to nourish our minds. We were sitting in 87th floor of the Empire State Building on a deserted evening and swamiji said all roads leads to our mind where we meditate create and contemplate. The best place in our existence. Our nirvana is in the deep of our minds. So cultivate your mind and always travel into the deepest alleys of your mind. Your body is just a shadow, your real YOU is in your mind. This conversation came back into my mind while listening to Ravi Shankar and Anoushka�s following sitar duet. What a powerful music to collect our scattered existence back to our minds. Listen to <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-KXk_8_8oLY">this from youtube</a>. </span>

httpv://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-KXk_8_8oLY

Commit message:

mukto-mona.net URLs updated Formatting; relative links fixed Author info updated Tags updated, cleaned up - MuktoMona Editor - koranic contradictions - women rights
html tags cleaned up

Moderate few Mehedi Hasan's posts as requested by moderators

input/posts/2009/09-06-destination-mind.md, after:

---
Title: Destination mind
Tags:
  - culture
  - Akbar Hussain
Published: 2009-09-06 05:41:28 +06:00
Updated: 2009-09-06 05:41:28 +06:00
OldURL: 2009/09/06/destination-mind/
---

<span style="font-size: medium; font-family: Garamond;">Sometimes I wonder where is the real beauty is it inside me or outside? Swami Shantanand Swarasswati once came to my off in New York and talked about our mind and music. He said if our mind is inside us and all our thoughts springs from the mind then truly we live in our minds. Fine music is pure honey to nourish our minds. We were sitting in 87th floor of the Empire State Building on a deserted evening and swamiji said all roads leads to our mind where we meditate create and contemplate. The best place in our existence. Our nirvana is in the deep of our minds. So cultivate your mind and always travel into the deepest alleys of your mind. Your body is just a shadow, your real YOU is in your mind. This conversation came back into my mind while listening to Ravi Shankar and Anoushka�s following sitar duet. What a powerful music to collect our scattered existence back to our minds.</span>

Listen to this performance on [youtube video link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-KXk_8_8oLY)

Additional Tags:
  - ravi shankar
  - anoushka shankar - raga anandi kalyan
  - swami shantanand swarasswati
  - nirvana
