input/posts/2009/12-30-calling-radicalization-instead-of-islamization-ignorance-or-political-correctness.md, before:

---
Title: Calling Radicalization, instead of Islamization - Ignorance or Political Correctness?
Tags:
  - Syed Kamran Mirza
Published: 2009-12-30 20:31:48 +06:00
Updated: 2009-12-30 20:31:48 +06:00
OldURL: 2009/12/30/calling-radicalization-instead-of-islamization-ignorance-or-political-correctness/
---

By Syed Kamran Mirza
Mirza.syed@gmail.com


*Blaise Pascal, mathematician, 1670*
> Men never do evil so completely and cheerfully as when they do it from religious conviction.

Over whelming ignorance of the western world about the roots of Islamic terrorism, erroneously calling radicalization instead of Islamization due to Political Correctness is ruining the success of war on terror. Political Correctness (PC) is indeed deadly for the western world! PC is killing the western civilization slowly but steadily. 

During the Bush era, we had been hearing: evil ideology, vicious ideology, militancy, and latest version we heard—Islamic terrorism; though former president occasionally used to say due to his PC syndrome: "Islam is a great religion or Islam is peace!" Though, at the end, Bush repeatedly did say "war on terror" or "war on evil ideology and Islamic militancy" at least. 

But surprisingly, president Obama in his incorrect, weak and apologetic notion of tackling this deadly Islamic terrorism he stopped uttering the word 'terrorism' to appease Muslim world. He rather started to call it "man-made disaster. Obama administration briefly considered calling 'terrorism' was an offense and insult to Islam or Muslims. Thereby, Obama administration has clearly demonstrated marked weakness and appeasement to those jihadi Islamic terrorists. Weakness of American president clearly has emboldened Islamic terrorists. Hence, this latest terrorist incident of the Christmas day has come on the heels of nearly a dozen terrorism probes and alleged plots to come to light in recent months. At least one of them (Fort-hood jihad) has actually occurred and was most deadly and costly for America. American mainland has become totally unsafe and vulnerable within the first year of Obama's administration.

Soon after that, White house reluctantly started to call it—militancy, extremism, or insurgency! Lately, White house started to use a brand-new terminology for Islamic terrorism which is—radicalism or radicalization. Still, white house is reluctant to call it "Islamic terrorism" or "war on terror!" Instead, they call it radicalism or radicalization. 

What is radicalism?

Question is what is radicalism or radicalization? Radicalized by what? Is it the new ideology or any new form of disease that infects these jihadi Muslims? Or, is it any new religion? Let's see what the actual definition of radicalism is. The dictionary meaning of the English word RADICAL is—going to the root or origin, or fundamentals of something like: political ideology, religious ideology, social rules, or economical rules etc. In fact, the word 'radical' is an adjective which is the modifiers or quantifiers of the nouns frequently used in English language as comparative and superlative forms. Hence, the word radical is an adjective of something or some ideological system. The word "radical" by itself has no meaning except it is the adjective of something. Now, puzzling question is, why then the western authority at large continue to call this terrorist phenomenon as radicalism or radicalization? Should not they be honest and courageous enough to name the exact ideology which is actually making them radicalized? Radicalized to nothing? Fact is, all these young jihadi muslims are radicalized to Islamic ideology, or to say correctly—they are radicalized by the pure or fundamental messages of Islam. 

Another wrong and strange terminology west frequently use is: extremism! What extremism means by itself? Extremism to what? Nothing? West must call it: 'Islamic extremism' or 'Religious extremism' which is the correct way of saying it. 

Acting alone or in a group! 

It seems, western politicians and Medias are hell-bent to ask one ridiculous question: "is he acted alone or in group?" As if, acting alone is not a problem, or acting in a group is more dangerous! This is silly question at least for Islamic terrorism. Either terrorist is alone or in a group of 5, 10, or 100s—it matters very little. Very few in number is not any important matter at all. Abdulmutallab of Nigeria alone has shaken the whole earth! Can't we see that?

Searching connection or names of the group, or names of the country are also another unnecessary event for the western authority. Islamic jihadis can have 100s of different names; but they all have the same objective of destroying the western civilization. These are pure Quranic muslims (radicalized by Islam) terrorists having strong connection to only one very strong and hateful ideology which is pure and original Islam. They all are radicalized by the same real and original 7th century version of puritanical Islam practiced by the Prophet and his followers. It does not matter at all where they have come from, or with what they are connected. They all are the fanatical followers of real Islam and they are well connected to the Islamic ideology.

It is also very true that, all Muslims are not terrorists but we must not forget that—all terrorists are pure Muslims. One needs to be radicalized by pure Islam only, in order to become a deadly terrorist. Fortunately, not all Muslims are radicalized! But many gullible muslims are also sympathized to radical Muslims. We must not forget that! 

Deception and self-deception!

For long, Muslims in general, and Muslim leaders, Imams, Muslim organizations (like CAIR, ICNA, ISNA etc) in particular are deceitfully fooling the western Governments by one constant and simple Mantra, which is: Islam is peaceful religion, Islam never advocate terrorism to kill the innocents, or Islam never condone suicide bombings etc. For long now, these Muslim spoke-persons are bluffing the west by parroting the same deceitful Mantra, time and again. At the same time, western politicians and western Medias are continuously calling it radicalization but do not mention to what, or by what these young Muslims are continuously radicalized! Therefore, they are clearly engaged in self-deception by their politically correctness (PC). By sheer deception and self-deception—the actual culprit to what these young Muslims (all over the world) are being continuously radicalized remains hidden or un-exposed. This hidden nameless culprit is no other than the 'religion of Islam' itself. These mindless terrorists like that Maj. Nidal Hasan at Fort-Hood, Umar farouk Abdulmutalab or all those al-Qaeda jihadi young muslims  all over the world are clearly radicalized by the teachings of real Islam and nothing but real Islam. Radical Islam mean pure or original Islam. Radical Islam is never a distorted or deviated Islam by any means. 
 
Sources of Terrorists' motivations and radicalization: 

Islamic terrorists do kill people by their Islamic fanatical motivations and these inspirations always come from the teachings of Islam (Holy Quran). Now, question is: dose the Quran contain such verses which can easily inspires/incites devout Muslims to kill people with impunity?  Answer is there are plenty of such inciting or inspiring Quranic verses which can turn any simple/innocent minded devout Muslims into a killing monster. In fact, Quran is replete with such horrifically inciting dictums throughout the pages of Quran. Holy Quran repeatedly promised terrestrial handsome rewards for those who can kill kaffirs (enemy of Allah and His messenger) and dreadful punishing hellfire for those who refuse to kill kaffirs.  Quran also incite followers to sacrifice their lives in order to kill kaffirs in exchange of much better and lucrative after life. In this line just one Quranic verse (9:111) is most attractive to those jihadis who desperately egger to achieve heavenly rearward of 72 virgins. Here is the master piece from Holy Quran:

Quran: 9:111, Allah hath purchased of the believers their persons and their goods; for theirs (in return) is the garden (of Paradise): they fight in His cause, and slay and are slain: a promise binding on Him in truth, through the Law, the Gospel, and the Quran.
In addition, a strong support and explanation to the verse: 9:111 was given by Merciful Allah by the following: 
Quran-4:74- Let those fight in the cause of Allah Who sell the life of this world for the hereafter. To him who fighteth in the cause of Allah,- whether he is slain or gets victory (i.e. killed or be killed) - Soon shall We give him a reward of great (value). 
Quran-4:95- Not equal are those believers who sit (at home) and receive no hurt, and those who strive and fight in the cause of Allah with their goods and their persons. Allah hath granted a grade higher to those who strive and fight with their goods and persons (sacrifice both life and wealth) than to those who sit (at home). Unto all (in Faith) Hath Allah promised good: But those who strive and fight Hath He distinguished above those who sit (at home) by a special reward.
Quran-3:169-: Think not of those who are slain in Allah's way as dead. Nay, they live, finding their sustenance in the presence of their Lord; (Here Allah is saying that those jihadi who dies [commit suicide] is not dead but he will be living with Allah).

Now, I do not believe that anybody can have slightest doubt that the above clear invitations (from Allah) for the ardent fanatical believers can very easily convince the blind pukka (pure) Muslims to become a time-bomb (suicidal) in order to kill infidels/kaffirs-for the cause of Allah! The above verses (9:111; 3:169; 4:74; 4:95) are clearly ordering devout Muslims "to kill and be killed"; that is, Allah is teaching Muslims to sacrifice their own lives (to commit suicide) in His cause (Allah's cause) in order to kill infidels (enemy of Allah). This single verse (9:111) very precisely justifies suicide bombing-the most lethal, most terrifying, most inhuman and most successful weapon majority Islamic terrorists are using today to kill Allah's enemies. It is the perfect example (without any ambiguity) of suicidal method Allah has prescribed for devout Muslims. In the verse above (9:111) Islamic Allah clearly saying that: He (Allah) purchased life and property of believers in exchange of lustful and unimaginable lucrative heavenly pleasures for those who will die (commit suicide) for the cause (killing kaffirs) of Allah. After this, Muslims (ardent followers of the Quran) do not need any more killing instructions for their motivation to kill kaffirs/infidels. For good reason we can sum up that the Islamic God (Allah) is the most dangerous deity having unlimited vengeful, cruel, intolerant, intimidating and war-loving blood thirsty divine entity.
But this is not all! Quran is loaded with numerous  hateful and killing verses ordering the ardent followers to carry out endless killing of infidels/unbelievers until only Muslims remain to inhibit this Earth owned by Islamic Allah. 

Making of Islamic jihadi terrorists!

Millions of young ardently devout muslims are continuously radicalized in Islamic teachings (cited above) by the Muslim clerics (Imams) in the Mosques and other places throughout the whole world. They are radicalized by pure and fundamental teachings of Quranic Islam. Actually, they are the real Muslims, and they are the Muslims by the book. All other billions of gullible Muslims and those so called progressive Muslims (living in the western comfort) are simply Muslims by virtue of their birth in a Muslim family. They hardly read and understand anything of Quran at all. 
The Christmas day Terrorist Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab is the testament of Islamic radicalization. This young man belonged to a very rich (Multimillionaire) family of Nigeria. Poverty did not touch him at all. But, in his very young age (school life in England) Islamic teachings and devoutness to pure Islam touched him a big-time. He became monster by his extra fervor in Islamic faith. No other force on earth could make him a monster like he was when he tried to detonate his bomb in Northwest Airlines flight-523 over Detroit, USA, only to kill several hundreds of most innocent humans. What could be the better example of Islamic radicalization then this one? Radicalized Muslims have declared open war against the west! West must not forget this for a moment! 

Calling spade a spade! 

To say only the adjective (radicalized) without the noun (Islam) is incorrect way of saying about Terrorist's mentality. Western authority should name the noun for which young muslims are being radicalized to! That noun is 'Islam' the name of an ideology of viciously hateful to non-muslims. 
Knowing the enemy is very crucial! 

West is still struggling with the real identity or real face of their greatest enemy ever and erroneously or, to keep maintain Politically Correctness, they just can not name the enemy with clarity. They also perhaps can not understand seriousness of this deadly fanatical enemy! Whether the west cowardly call it a man-made disaster, or erroneously call it—militancy, evil ideology, vicious ideology, extremism, radicals, radicalization, etc, etc; however, it is more than sure that—this enemy is the pure Islamic jihad the historical imperialistic brain-child of Islam. Radical Islam is nothing but the real pure Islam, and radicalized young Muslims are the dedicated soldiers of Allah who are hell-bent to destroy the west in general and America in particular.

Proponents of American 'political correctness' do not know that, these Islamic jihadis are fighting from many fronts, in order to subdue American infidels to fulfill their holy wish of converting America into an Islamic nation, establish Islamic sharia (the draconian) law, and to hoist Islamic flag over the White House. I am afraid, super irresponsible political correctness may allow that to happen soon.

How can one cure a body by keeping the cancerous lesion inside the body? Nothing can change this precarious situation created by fanatical jihadi Muslims unless we realize the real problem (read Quran) and take care of it. 

**References**
1. The Holy Qur'an, Translated by A. Yousuf Ali, Published by Amana Corporation, Brentwood, Maryland, 1983. 
2. The Holy Qur'an, Translated by Dr. Muhammad Taqi-ud-Din Al-Hilali, Formerly   Professor of Islamic Faith and Teachings, Islamic University, Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah and Dr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan, Formerly Director, University Hospital, Islamic University, Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah. "The Noble Qur'an" – Published and freely distributed by His Excellency King Fahd Bin Abdul Aziz (Khademul Haramine Shareefine).

Commit message:

More posts formatted in markdown; relative links fixed Author/Email updated Tags updated, cleaned up some trashed articles (NULL tag) removed

input/posts/2009/12-30-calling-radicalization-instead-of-islamization-ignorance-or-political-correctness.md, after:

---
Title: Calling Radicalization, instead of Islamization - Ignorance or Political Correctness?
Tags:
  - Syed Kamran Mirza
Published: 2009-12-30 20:31:48 +06:00
Updated: 2009-12-30 20:31:48 +06:00
OldURL: 2009/12/30/calling-radicalization-instead-of-islamization-ignorance-or-political-correctness/
---

~ *[Syed Kamran Mirza](https://gold.mukto-mona.com/Articles/skm/index.html)*  


*Blaise Pascal, mathematician, 1670*
> Men never do evil so completely and cheerfully as when they do it from religious conviction.

Over whelming ignorance of the western world about the roots of Islamic terrorism, erroneously calling radicalization instead of Islamization due to Political Correctness is ruining the success of war on terror. Political Correctness (PC) is indeed deadly for the western world! PC is killing the western civilization slowly but steadily. 

During the Bush era, we had been hearing: evil ideology, vicious ideology, militancy, and latest version we heard—Islamic terrorism; though former president occasionally used to say due to his PC syndrome: "Islam is a great religion or Islam is peace!" Though, at the end, Bush repeatedly did say "war on terror" or "war on evil ideology and Islamic militancy" at least. 

But surprisingly, president Obama in his incorrect, weak and apologetic notion of tackling this deadly Islamic terrorism he stopped uttering the word 'terrorism' to appease Muslim world. He rather started to call it "man-made disaster. Obama administration briefly considered calling 'terrorism' was an offense and insult to Islam or Muslims. Thereby, Obama administration has clearly demonstrated marked weakness and appeasement to those jihadi Islamic terrorists. Weakness of American president clearly has emboldened Islamic terrorists. Hence, this latest terrorist incident of the Christmas day has come on the heels of nearly a dozen terrorism probes and alleged plots to come to light in recent months. At least one of them (Fort-hood jihad) has actually occurred and was most deadly and costly for America. American mainland has become totally unsafe and vulnerable within the first year of Obama's administration.

Soon after that, White house reluctantly started to call it—militancy, extremism, or insurgency! Lately, White house started to use a brand-new terminology for Islamic terrorism which is—radicalism or radicalization. Still, white house is reluctant to call it "Islamic terrorism" or "war on terror!" Instead, they call it radicalism or radicalization. 

What is radicalism?

Question is what is radicalism or radicalization? Radicalized by what? Is it the new ideology or any new form of disease that infects these jihadi Muslims? Or, is it any new religion? Let's see what the actual definition of radicalism is. The dictionary meaning of the English word RADICAL is—going to the root or origin, or fundamentals of something like: political ideology, religious ideology, social rules, or economical rules etc. In fact, the word 'radical' is an adjective which is the modifiers or quantifiers of the nouns frequently used in English language as comparative and superlative forms. Hence, the word radical is an adjective of something or some ideological system. The word "radical" by itself has no meaning except it is the adjective of something. Now, puzzling question is, why then the western authority at large continue to call this terrorist phenomenon as radicalism or radicalization? Should not they be honest and courageous enough to name the exact ideology which is actually making them radicalized? Radicalized to nothing? Fact is, all these young jihadi muslims are radicalized to Islamic ideology, or to say correctly—they are radicalized by the pure or fundamental messages of Islam. 

Another wrong and strange terminology west frequently use is: extremism! What extremism means by itself? Extremism to what? Nothing? West must call it: 'Islamic extremism' or 'Religious extremism' which is the correct way of saying it. 

Acting alone or in a group! 

It seems, western politicians and Medias are hell-bent to ask one ridiculous question: "is he acted alone or in group?" As if, acting alone is not a problem, or acting in a group is more dangerous! This is silly question at least for Islamic terrorism. Either terrorist is alone or in a group of 5, 10, or 100s—it matters very little. Very few in number is not any important matter at all. Abdulmutallab of Nigeria alone has shaken the whole earth! Can't we see that?

Searching connection or names of the group, or names of the country are also another unnecessary event for the western authority. Islamic jihadis can have 100s of different names; but they all have the same objective of destroying the western civilization. These are pure Quranic muslims (radicalized by Islam) terrorists having strong connection to only one very strong and hateful ideology which is pure and original Islam. They all are radicalized by the same real and original 7th century version of puritanical Islam practiced by the Prophet and his followers. It does not matter at all where they have come from, or with what they are connected. They all are the fanatical followers of real Islam and they are well connected to the Islamic ideology.

It is also very true that, all Muslims are not terrorists but we must not forget that—all terrorists are pure Muslims. One needs to be radicalized by pure Islam only, in order to become a deadly terrorist. Fortunately, not all Muslims are radicalized! But many gullible muslims are also sympathized to radical Muslims. We must not forget that! 

Deception and self-deception!

For long, Muslims in general, and Muslim leaders, Imams, Muslim organizations (like CAIR, ICNA, ISNA etc) in particular are deceitfully fooling the western Governments by one constant and simple Mantra, which is: Islam is peaceful religion, Islam never advocate terrorism to kill the innocents, or Islam never condone suicide bombings etc. For long now, these Muslim spoke-persons are bluffing the west by parroting the same deceitful Mantra, time and again. At the same time, western politicians and western Medias are continuously calling it radicalization but do not mention to what, or by what these young Muslims are continuously radicalized! Therefore, they are clearly engaged in self-deception by their politically correctness (PC). By sheer deception and self-deception—the actual culprit to what these young Muslims (all over the world) are being continuously radicalized remains hidden or un-exposed. This hidden nameless culprit is no other than the 'religion of Islam' itself. These mindless terrorists like that Maj. Nidal Hasan at Fort-Hood, Umar farouk Abdulmutalab or all those al-Qaeda jihadi young muslims  all over the world are clearly radicalized by the teachings of real Islam and nothing but real Islam. Radical Islam mean pure or original Islam. Radical Islam is never a distorted or deviated Islam by any means. 
 
Sources of Terrorists' motivations and radicalization: 

Islamic terrorists do kill people by their Islamic fanatical motivations and these inspirations always come from the teachings of Islam (Holy Quran). Now, question is: dose the Quran contain such verses which can easily inspires/incites devout Muslims to kill people with impunity?  Answer is there are plenty of such inciting or inspiring Quranic verses which can turn any simple/innocent minded devout Muslims into a killing monster. In fact, Quran is replete with such horrifically inciting dictums throughout the pages of Quran. Holy Quran repeatedly promised terrestrial handsome rewards for those who can kill kaffirs (enemy of Allah and His messenger) and dreadful punishing hellfire for those who refuse to kill kaffirs.  Quran also incite followers to sacrifice their lives in order to kill kaffirs in exchange of much better and lucrative after life. In this line just one Quranic verse (9:111) is most attractive to those jihadis who desperately egger to achieve heavenly rearward of 72 virgins. Here is the master piece from Holy Quran:

Quran: 9:111, Allah hath purchased of the believers their persons and their goods; for theirs (in return) is the garden (of Paradise): they fight in His cause, and slay and are slain: a promise binding on Him in truth, through the Law, the Gospel, and the Quran.
In addition, a strong support and explanation to the verse: 9:111 was given by Merciful Allah by the following: 
Quran-4:74- Let those fight in the cause of Allah Who sell the life of this world for the hereafter. To him who fighteth in the cause of Allah,- whether he is slain or gets victory (i.e. killed or be killed) - Soon shall We give him a reward of great (value). 
Quran-4:95- Not equal are those believers who sit (at home) and receive no hurt, and those who strive and fight in the cause of Allah with their goods and their persons. Allah hath granted a grade higher to those who strive and fight with their goods and persons (sacrifice both life and wealth) than to those who sit (at home). Unto all (in Faith) Hath Allah promised good: But those who strive and fight Hath He distinguished above those who sit (at home) by a special reward.
Quran-3:169-: Think not of those who are slain in Allah's way as dead. Nay, they live, finding their sustenance in the presence of their Lord; (Here Allah is saying that those jihadi who dies [commit suicide] is not dead but he will be living with Allah).

Now, I do not believe that anybody can have slightest doubt that the above clear invitations (from Allah) for the ardent fanatical believers can very easily convince the blind pukka (pure) Muslims to become a time-bomb (suicidal) in order to kill infidels/kaffirs-for the cause of Allah! The above verses (9:111; 3:169; 4:74; 4:95) are clearly ordering devout Muslims "to kill and be killed"; that is, Allah is teaching Muslims to sacrifice their own lives (to commit suicide) in His cause (Allah's cause) in order to kill infidels (enemy of Allah). This single verse (9:111) very precisely justifies suicide bombing-the most lethal, most terrifying, most inhuman and most successful weapon majority Islamic terrorists are using today to kill Allah's enemies. It is the perfect example (without any ambiguity) of suicidal method Allah has prescribed for devout Muslims. In the verse above (9:111) Islamic Allah clearly saying that: He (Allah) purchased life and property of believers in exchange of lustful and unimaginable lucrative heavenly pleasures for those who will die (commit suicide) for the cause (killing kaffirs) of Allah. After this, Muslims (ardent followers of the Quran) do not need any more killing instructions for their motivation to kill kaffirs/infidels. For good reason we can sum up that the Islamic God (Allah) is the most dangerous deity having unlimited vengeful, cruel, intolerant, intimidating and war-loving blood thirsty divine entity.
But this is not all! Quran is loaded with numerous  hateful and killing verses ordering the ardent followers to carry out endless killing of infidels/unbelievers until only Muslims remain to inhibit this Earth owned by Islamic Allah. 

Making of Islamic jihadi terrorists!

Millions of young ardently devout muslims are continuously radicalized in Islamic teachings (cited above) by the Muslim clerics (Imams) in the Mosques and other places throughout the whole world. They are radicalized by pure and fundamental teachings of Quranic Islam. Actually, they are the real Muslims, and they are the Muslims by the book. All other billions of gullible Muslims and those so called progressive Muslims (living in the western comfort) are simply Muslims by virtue of their birth in a Muslim family. They hardly read and understand anything of Quran at all. 
The Christmas day Terrorist Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab is the testament of Islamic radicalization. This young man belonged to a very rich (Multimillionaire) family of Nigeria. Poverty did not touch him at all. But, in his very young age (school life in England) Islamic teachings and devoutness to pure Islam touched him a big-time. He became monster by his extra fervor in Islamic faith. No other force on earth could make him a monster like he was when he tried to detonate his bomb in Northwest Airlines flight-523 over Detroit, USA, only to kill several hundreds of most innocent humans. What could be the better example of Islamic radicalization then this one? Radicalized Muslims have declared open war against the west! West must not forget this for a moment! 

Calling spade a spade! 

To say only the adjective (radicalized) without the noun (Islam) is incorrect way of saying about Terrorist's mentality. Western authority should name the noun for which young muslims are being radicalized to! That noun is 'Islam' the name of an ideology of viciously hateful to non-muslims. 
Knowing the enemy is very crucial! 

West is still struggling with the real identity or real face of their greatest enemy ever and erroneously or, to keep maintain Politically Correctness, they just can not name the enemy with clarity. They also perhaps can not understand seriousness of this deadly fanatical enemy! Whether the west cowardly call it a man-made disaster, or erroneously call it—militancy, evil ideology, vicious ideology, extremism, radicals, radicalization, etc, etc; however, it is more than sure that—this enemy is the pure Islamic jihad the historical imperialistic brain-child of Islam. Radical Islam is nothing but the real pure Islam, and radicalized young Muslims are the dedicated soldiers of Allah who are hell-bent to destroy the west in general and America in particular.

Proponents of American 'political correctness' do not know that, these Islamic jihadis are fighting from many fronts, in order to subdue American infidels to fulfill their holy wish of converting America into an Islamic nation, establish Islamic sharia (the draconian) law, and to hoist Islamic flag over the White House. I am afraid, super irresponsible political correctness may allow that to happen soon.

How can one cure a body by keeping the cancerous lesion inside the body? Nothing can change this precarious situation created by fanatical jihadi Muslims unless we realize the real problem (read Quran) and take care of it. 

**References**
1. The Holy Qur'an, Translated by A. Yousuf Ali, Published by Amana Corporation, Brentwood, Maryland, 1983. 
2. The Holy Qur'an, Translated by Dr. Muhammad Taqi-ud-Din Al-Hilali, Formerly   Professor of Islamic Faith and Teachings, Islamic University, Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah and Dr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan, Formerly Director, University Hospital, Islamic University, Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah. "The Noble Qur'an" – Published and freely distributed by His Excellency King Fahd Bin Abdul Aziz (Khademul Haramine Shareefine).


-----
*Syed Kamran Mirza*
- Born in a Muslim family of Bangladesh
- After having Ph.D. in Biological science he worked as a teacher in one of the reputed Universities in Bangladesh for a period of 12 years, now lives in USA
- Author of the book, "Roots of Islamic Terrorism" published in 2004
- Published more than 200 articles scrutinizing in various aspects of Islam, some of which have been published in the reputed journals
- Can be reached at *mirza.syed at gmail dot com*
